建築基準法（暫定版）
Building Standards Act (Tentative translation)
目次
Table of Contents
第一章　総則（第一条―第十八条の三）
Chapter I General Provisions (Articles 1 to 18-3)
第二章　建築物の敷地、構造及び建築設備（第十九条―第四十一条）
Chapter II Site, Construction and Building Equipment of buildings (Articles 19 to 41)
第三章　都市計画区域等における建築物の敷地、構造、建築設備及び用途
Chapter III Site, Construction, Building Equipment and Use of Buildings within City Planning Areas
第一節　総則（第四十一条の二・第四十二条）
Section 1 General Provisions (Article 41-2 and 42)
第二節　建築物又はその敷地と道路又は壁面線との関係等（第四十三条―第四十七条）
Section 2 Relations between Buildings or Their Sites and Roads or Wall Alignment (Articles 43 to 47)
第三節　建築物の用途（第四十八条―第五十一条）
Section 3 Use of Buildings (Articles 48 to 51)
第四節　建築物の敷地及び構造（第五十二条―第六十条）
Section 4 Site and Construction of Buildings (Articles 52 to 60)
第四節の二　都市再生特別地区、居住環境向上用途誘導地区及び特定用途誘導地区（第六十条の二―第六十条の三）
Section 4-2 Special Districts for Urban Renaissance, Guided Land Use Districts for Residential Environment Improvement and Special Use Attraction District (Article 60-2 to 60-3)
第五節　防火地域及び準防火地域（第六十一条―第六十六条）
Section 5 Fire Prevention Districts and Quasi-fire Prevention District (Articles 61 to 66)
第五節の二　特定防災街区整備地区（第六十七条・第六十七条の二）
Section 5-2 Specified Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone (Articles 67 and 67-2)
第六節　景観地区（第六十八条）
Section 6 Landscape Districts (Article 68)
第七節　地区計画等の区域（第六十八条の二―第六十八条の八）
Section 7 Areas of District Planning (Articles 68-2 to 68-8)
第八節　都市計画区域及び準都市計画区域以外の区域内の建築物の敷地及び構造（第六十八条の九）
Section 8 Site and Construction of Buildings in Areas Other than City Planning Areas and Quasi-city Planning Areas (Article 68-9)
第三章の二　型式適合認定等（第六十八条の十―第六十八条の二十六）
Chapter III-2 Type-Approval (Articles 68-11 to 68-26)
第四章　建築協定（第六十九条―第七十七条）
Chapter IV Building Agreement (Articles 69 to 77)
第四章の二　指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関等
Chapter IV-2 Designated Qualifying Examination Body for Qualified Building Regulation Conformity Inspectors
第一節　指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関（第七十七条の二―第七十七条の十七）
Section 1 Designated Qualifying Examination Body for Qualified Building Regulation Conformity Inspectors (Articles 77-2 to 77-17)
第一節の二　指定構造計算適合判定資格者検定機関（第七十七条の十七の二）
Section 1-2 Designated Qualifying Examination Body for Qualified Structural Calculation Reviewers (Article 77-17-2)
第二節　指定確認検査機関（第七十七条の十八―第七十七条の三十五）
Section 2 Designated Confirmation and Inspection Bodies (Articles 77-18 to 77-35)
第三節　指定構造計算適合性判定機関（第七十七条の三十五の二―第七十七条の三十五の二十一）
Section 3 Designated Structural Calculation Conformity Review Body (Articles 77-35-2 to 77-35-21)
第四節　指定認定機関等（第七十七条の三十六―第七十七条の五十五）
Section 4 Designated Approval Body, (Articles 77-36 to 77-55)
第五節　指定性能評価機関等（第七十七条の五十六・第七十七条の五十七）
Section 5 Designated Performance Evaluation Body (Article 77-56 and Article 77-57)
第四章の三　建築基準適合判定資格者等の登録
Chapter IV-3 Registration of Qualified Building Regulation Conformity Inspectors
第一節　建築基準適合判定資格者の登録（第七十七条の五十八―第七十七条の六十五）
Section 1 Registration of Qualified Building Regulation Conformity Inspectors (Articles 77-58 to 77-65)
第二節　構造計算適合判定資格者の登録（第七十七条の六十六）
Section 2 Registration of Qualified Structural Calculation Reviewers (Article 77-66)
第五章　建築審査会（第七十八条―第八十三条）
Chapter V Building Review Council (Articles 78 to 83)
第六章　雑則（第八十四条―第九十七条の六）
Chapter VI Miscellaneous Provisions (Articles 84 to 97-6)
第七章　罰則（第九十八条―第百七条）
Chapter VII Penal Provisions (Articles 98 to 107)
第一章　総則
Chapter I General Provisions
（目的）
(Purpose)
第一条　この法律は、建築物の敷地、構造、設備及び用途に関する最低の基準を定めて、国民の生命、健康及び財産の保護を図り、もつて公共の福祉の増進に資することを目的とする。
Article 1  The purpose of this Act is to safeguard the life, health, and property of people by providing minimum standards concerning the site, construction, equipment, and use of buildings, and thereby to contribute to the furtherance of the public welfare.
（用語の定義）
(Definition of Terms)
第二条　この法律において次の各号に掲げる用語の意義は、それぞれ当該各号に定めるところによる。
Article 2  In this Act, the meaning of the terms set forth in the following items shall be as defined in each item concerned:
一　建築物　土地に定着する工作物のうち、屋根及び柱若しくは壁を有するもの（これに類する構造のものを含む。）、これに附属する門若しくは塀、観覧のための工作物又は地下若しくは高架の工作物内に設ける事務所、店舗、興行場、倉庫その他これらに類する施設（鉄道及び軌道の線路敷地内の運転保安に関する施設並びに跨（こ）線橋、プラットホームの上家、貯蔵槽その他これらに類する施設を除く。）をいい、建築設備を含むものとする。
(i) buildings: Structures fixed on the ground having roofs, and columns or walls (including structures of similar construction); gates or fences attached thereto; structures used as grand-stands; or structures used as offices, stores, play houses, warehouses or other facilities similar thereto established in underground or elevated structures (excluding those facilities which are provided within the site of a railway or tramway for the operation and maintenance thereof, and over bridges, platform sheds, storage tanks and other facilities similar thereto). Building equipment shall be considered as part of a building;
二　特殊建築物　学校（専修学校及び各種学校を含む。以下同様とする。）、体育館、病院、劇場、観覧場、集会場、展示場、百貨店、市場、ダンスホール、遊技場、公衆浴場、旅館、共同住宅、寄宿舎、下宿、工場、倉庫、自動車車庫、危険物の貯蔵場、と畜場、火葬場、汚物処理場その他これらに類する用途に供する建築物をいう。
(ii) special buildings: Schools (including special training colleges and miscellaneous schools; hereinafter the same), gymnasium, hospitals, theaters, grand-stands, assembly halls, exhibition halls, department stores, markets, dance halls, amusement halls, public bathhouses, hotels/inns, apartment houses, dormitories, boarding houses, factories, warehouses, automobile garages, storage facilities for hazardous materials, slaughter houses, crematoria, waste disposal plants or other buildings for use similar thereto;
三　建築設備　建築物に設ける電気、ガス、給水、排水、換気、暖房、冷房、消火、排煙若しくは汚物処理の設備又は煙突、昇降機若しくは避雷針をいう。
(iii) building equipment: Facilities provided in or on a building for the purpose of electricity supply, gas supply, water supply, drainage, ventilation, heating, cooling, fire extinguishing, smoke exhaust, or waste disposal, or chimneys, elevatory system or lightning rods;
四　居室　居住、執務、作業、集会、娯楽その他これらに類する目的のために継続的に使用する室をいう。
(iv) habitable rooms: Rooms as are used continuously for living, conducting office or other work, meetings, entertainment, or other purposes similar thereto;
五　主要構造部　壁、柱、床、はり、屋根又は階段をいい、建築物の構造上重要でない間仕切壁、間柱、付け柱、揚げ床、最下階の床、回り舞台の床、小ばり、ひさし、局部的な小階段、屋外階段その他これらに類する建築物の部分を除くものとする。
(v) principal building parts: Walls, columns, floors, beams, roofs, or stairs of buildings excluding those parts thereof which are not important from structural viewpoints such as partition walls, studs, attached columns, removable floor boards, the floors of the lowest floor or basement, revolving stage boards, small beams, pent roofs, small stairs for local use, outside stairs, and any other parts of buildings similar thereto;
六　延焼のおそれのある部分　隣地境界線、道路中心線又は同一敷地内の二以上の建築物（延べ面積の合計が五百平方メートル以内の建築物は、一の建築物とみなす。）相互の外壁間の中心線（ロにおいて「隣地境界線等」という。）から、一階にあつては三メートル以下、二階以上にあつては五メートル以下の距離にある建築物の部分をいう。ただし、次のイ又はロのいずれかに該当する部分を除く。
(vi) parts liable to catch fire: Parts of a building within a distance of 3 meters or less, for the first floor, or 5 meters or less, for the second or higher floors, from the boundary line with the adjacent land lot, the center line of the road, or the center line (referred to as the "boundary line of the adjacent land lot, etc." in (b)) between exterior walls of two or more buildings on the same site (buildings with an aggregate of total floor areas not exceeding 500 square meters shall be regarded as one building). Provided, however, the parts under either (a) or (b), below shall be excluded;
イ　防火上有効な公園、広場、川その他の空地又は水面、耐火構造の壁その他これらに類するものに面する部分
(a) parts facing an open space, such as a park or a public square, or those that face a body of water, such as a river, which is effective from the viewpoint of fire prevention, or a wall of fire-resistive construction, or anything similar thereto;
ロ　建築物の外壁面と隣地境界線等との角度に応じて、当該建築物の周囲において発生する通常の火災時における火熱により燃焼するおそれのないものとして国土交通大臣が定める部分
(b) parts specified by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, according to the angle formed by the part of the exterior walls of a building and the boundary line of the adjacent land lot, etc., as those of which combustion is unlikely to be caused under the effects of heat during a normal fire that starts in the area surrounding the relevant building.
七　耐火構造　壁、柱、床その他の建築物の部分の構造のうち、耐火性能（通常の火災が終了するまでの間当該火災による建築物の倒壊及び延焼を防止するために当該建築物の部分に必要とされる性能をいう。）に関して政令で定める技術的基準に適合する鉄筋コンクリート造、れんが造その他の構造で、国土交通大臣が定めた構造方法を用いるもの又は国土交通大臣の認定を受けたものをいう。
(vii) fire-resistive construction: The type of construction for walls, columns, floors and other parts of a building which conforms to technical criteria established by Cabinet Order concerning fire-resistive performance (performance required for the relevant parts of buildings to prevent a normal fire from causing both the collapse of the building and the spread of fire until the end of the relevant normal fire), such as reinforced concrete structure and brick structure and which uses construction methods established by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or which was approved by the Minister;
七の二　準耐火構造　壁、柱、床その他の建築物の部分の構造のうち、準耐火性能（通常の火災による延焼を抑制するために当該建築物の部分に必要とされる性能をいう。第九号の三ロにおいて同じ。）に関して政令で定める技術的基準に適合するもので、国土交通大臣が定めた構造方法を用いるもの又は国土交通大臣の認定を受けたものをいう。
(vii)-2 quasi Fire-resistive construction: The type of construction for walls, columns, floors and other parts of a building which conforms to technical criteria established by Cabinet Order concerning quasi fire-resistive performance (performance required for the relevant parts of buildings to restrict the spread of a normal fire; the same in item (ix)-3, (b)) and which uses construction methods established by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or which was approved by the Minister;
八　防火構造　建築物の外壁又は軒裏の構造のうち、防火性能（建築物の周囲において発生する通常の火災による延焼を抑制するために当該外壁又は軒裏に必要とされる性能をいう。）に関して政令で定める技術的基準に適合する鉄網モルタル塗、しつくい塗その他の構造で、国土交通大臣が定めた構造方法を用いるもの又は国土交通大臣の認定を受けたものをいう。
(viii) fire preventive construction: The type of construction for exterior walls and soffits of a building which conforms to technical criteria established by Cabinet Order concerning fire preventive performance (performance required for an exterior wall or soffit to restrict the spread of a normal fire that starts in the area surrounding a building), such as metal lath with mortar finish, plaster finish or other construction methods and which uses construction methods established by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or which is approved by the Minister;
九　不燃材料　建築材料のうち、不燃性能（通常の火災時における火熱により燃焼しないことその他の政令で定める性能をいう。）に関して政令で定める技術的基準に適合するもので、国土交通大臣が定めたもの又は国土交通大臣の認定を受けたものをいう。
(ix) noncombustible materials: Building materials which conform to technical criteria established by Cabinet Order concerning noncombustibility (performance specified by Cabinet Order, such as performance required for a material that prevents its combustion under the effects of heat during a normal fire and other performance) and which were specified by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or which were approved by the Minister;
九の二　耐火建築物　次に掲げる基準に適合する建築物をいう。
(ix)-2 fire-resistive buildings: Buildings that conform to the following criteria:
イ　その主要構造部が（１）又は（２）のいずれかに該当すること。
(a) buildings of which principal building parts come under either 1. or 2. Below;
（１）　耐火構造であること。
1. those which are of fire-resistive construction;
（２）　次に掲げる性能（外壁以外の主要構造部にあつては、（ｉ）に掲げる性能に限る。）に関して政令で定める技術的基準に適合するものであること。
2. those which conform to technical criteria specified by Cabinet Order concerning the following performances (in the case of principal building parts other than exterior walls, only the performance set forth in i.):
（ｉ）　当該建築物の構造、建築設備及び用途に応じて屋内において発生が予測される火災による火熱に当該火災が終了するまで耐えること。
i. those which can withstand the heat of a fire predicted to occur inside the building according to the construction, building equipment, and use of the relevant building until the end of the relevant fire;
（ｉｉ）　当該建築物の周囲において発生する通常の火災による火熱に当該火災が終了するまで耐えること。
ii. those which can withstand the heat of a normal fire occurring in the area surrounding the relevant building until the end of the relevant fire.
ロ　その外壁の開口部で延焼のおそれのある部分に、防火戸その他の政令で定める防火設備（その構造が遮炎性能（通常の火災時における火炎を有効に遮るために防火設備に必要とされる性能をいう。第二十七条第一項において同じ。）に関して政令で定める技術的基準に適合するもので、国土交通大臣が定めた構造方法を用いるもの又は国土交通大臣の認定を受けたものに限る。）を有すること。
(b) buildings which have fire doors or other opening protective assembly specified by Cabinet Order (limited to equipment of which construction conforms to technical criteria established by Cabinet Order concerning flame blocking performance (performance of opening protective assembly necessary to block flames effectively during a normal fire, the same in Article 27, paragraph (1)), and use construction methods established by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or which were approved by the Minister) at those parts liable to catch fire of openings in exterior walls.
九の三　準耐火建築物　耐火建築物以外の建築物で、イ又はロのいずれかに該当し、外壁の開口部で延焼のおそれのある部分に前号ロに規定する防火設備を有するものをいう。
(ix)-3 quasi fire-resistive buildings: Buildings other than fire-resistive buildings and which come under either (a) or (b), and which have opening protective assembly provided for in (b) in the preceding item at those parts liable to catch fire of openings in exterior walls;
イ　主要構造部を準耐火構造としたもの
(a) buildings of which principal building parts are of quasi fire-resistive construction;
ロ　イに掲げる建築物以外の建築物であつて、イに掲げるものと同等の準耐火性能を有するものとして主要構造部の防火の措置その他の事項について政令で定める技術的基準に適合するもの
(b) buildings other than those set forth in (a), which conform to technical criteria established by Cabinet Order as having quasi fire-resistive performance equivalent to that of those set forth in (a) concerning fire safety measures for principal building parts and other items.
十　設計　建築士法（昭和二十五年法律第二百二号）第二条第六項に規定する設計をいう。
(x) design: A design provided for in Article 2, paragraph (6) of the Act on Architects and Building Engineers (Act No. 202 of 1950);
十一　工事監理者　建築士法第二条第八項に規定する工事監理をする者をいう。
(xi) a person who conducts construction administration: A person who conducts construction administration provided for in Article 2, paragraph (8) of the Act on Architects and Building Engineers;
十二　設計図書　建築物、その敷地又は第八十八条第一項から第三項までに規定する工作物に関する工事用の図面（現寸図その他これに類するものを除く。）及び仕様書をいう。
(xii) drawings/specifications: Drawings (excluding full size drawings and other drawings similar thereto) and specifications for construction work for a building or its site, or a structure as provided for in Article 88, paragraphs (1) through (3);
十三　建築　建築物を新築し、増築し、改築し、又は移転することをいう。
(xiii) construction: To newly construct, add, rebuild, or relocate a building;
十四　大規模の修繕　建築物の主要構造部の一種以上について行う過半の修繕をいう。
(xiv) major repair: Repair of a building to one or more of the principal building parts thereof exceeding 50% of all the parts of the same principal building parts;
十五　大規模の模様替　建築物の主要構造部の一種以上について行う過半の模様替をいう。
(xv) major remodeling: Remodeling of a building to one or more of the principal building parts thereof exceeding 50% of all the parts of the same principal building parts;
十六　建築主　建築物に関する工事の請負契約の注文者又は請負契約によらないで自らその工事をする者をいう。
(xvi) building owner: A person ordering construction work for a building by contract, or a person undertaking construction work oneself without making a contract therefor;
十七　設計者　その者の責任において、設計図書を作成した者をいい、建築士法第二十条の二第三項又は第二十条の三第三項の規定により建築物が構造関係規定（同法第二十条の二第二項に規定する構造関係規定をいう。第五条の六第二項及び第六条第三項第二号において同じ。）又は設備関係規定（同法第二十条の三第二項に規定する設備関係規定をいう。第五条の六第三項及び第六条第三項第三号において同じ。）に適合することを確認した構造設計一級建築士（同法第十条の二の二第四項に規定する構造設計一級建築士をいう。第五条の六第二項及び第六条第三項第二号において同じ。）又は設備設計一級建築士（同法第十条の二の二第四項に規定する設備設計一級建築士をいう。第五条の六第三項及び第六条第三項第三号において同じ。）を含むものとする。
(xvii) designer: A person who has drafted drawings/specifications under such person's own responsibility; and shall include a Structural Design 1st-class Kenchikushi (refers to Structural Design 1st-class Kenchikushi provided for in Article 20-2-2, paragraph (4) of the Act on Architects and Building Engineers; the same in Article 5-6, paragraph (2) and Article 6, paragraph (3), item (ii)) and an MEP design 1st-class Kenchikushi (refers to MEP Design 1st-class Kenchikushi specified in Article 10-2-2, paragraph (4) of the same Act; the same in Article 5-6, paragraph (3) and Article 6, paragraph (3), item (iii)) who have confirmed , pursuant to the provisions of Article 20-2, paragraph (3) or Article 20-3, paragraph (3) of the same Act, that the building conforms to structure-related provisions (refers to structure-related provisions specified in Article 20-2, paragraph (2) of the same Act; the same in Article 5-6, paragraph (2) and Article 6, paragraph (3), item (ii)) and to MEP-related provisions (refers to MEP-related provisions specified in Article 20-3, paragraph (2) of the same Act; the same in Article 5-6, paragraph (3) and Article 6, paragraph (3) item (iii));
十八　工事施工者　建築物、その敷地若しくは第八十八条第一項から第三項までに規定する工作物に関する工事の請負人又は請負契約によらないで自らこれらの工事をする者をいう。
(xviii) executor of construction work: A contractor of construction work for a building, its site, or a structure as provided for in Article 88, paragraphs (1) through (3), or a person undertaking that construction work oneself without making a contract therefor;
十九　都市計画　都市計画法（昭和四十三年法律第百号）第四条第一項に規定する都市計画をいう。
(xix) city planning: City planning as provided for in Article 4, paragraph (1) of the City Planning Act (Act No. 100 of 1968);
二十　都市計画区域又は準都市計画区域　それぞれ、都市計画法第四条第二項に規定する都市計画区域又は準都市計画区域をいう。
(xx) city Planning Area or Quasi-city Planning Area: A City Planning Area or Quasi-city Planning Area as provided for in Article 4, paragraph (2) of the City Planning Act;
二十一　第一種低層住居専用地域、第二種低層住居専用地域、第一種中高層住居専用地域、第二種中高層住居専用地域、第一種住居地域、第二種住居地域、準住居地域、田園住居地域、近隣商業地域、商業地域、準工業地域、工業地域、工業専用地域、特別用途地区、特定用途制限地域、特例容積率適用地区、高層住居誘導地区、高度地区、高度利用地区、特定街区、都市再生特別地区、居住環境向上用途誘導地区、特定用途誘導地区、防火地域、準防火地域、特定防災街区整備地区又は景観地区　それぞれ、都市計画法第八条第一項第一号から第六号までに掲げる第一種低層住居専用地域、第二種低層住居専用地域、第一種中高層住居専用地域、第二種中高層住居専用地域、第一種住居地域、第二種住居地域、準住居地域、田園住居地域、近隣商業地域、商業地域、準工業地域、工業地域、工業専用地域、特別用途地区、特定用途制限地域、特例容積率適用地区、高層住居誘導地区、高度地区、高度利用地区、特定街区、都市再生特別地区、居住環境向上用途誘導地区、特定用途誘導地区、防火地域、準防火地域、特定防災街区整備地区又は景観地区をいう。
(xxi) category 1 Low-rise Exclusive Residential District, Category 2 Low-rise Exclusive Residential District, Category 1 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential District, Category 2 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential District, Category 1 Residential District, Category 2 Residential District, Quasi-residential District, Countryside Residential District, Neighborhood Commercial District, Commercial District, Quasi-industrial District, Industrial District, Exclusive Industrial District, Special Use District, Special Use Restriction District, Exceptional Floor Area Ratio District, High-rise residential Attraction Districts, Height Control District, High-level Use District, Specified Block, Special Districts for Urban Renaissance, Guided Land Use Districts for Residential Environment Improvement, Special Use Attraction District, Fire Prevention District, Quasi-fire Prevention District, Specified Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zones or Landscape District: Category 1 Low-rise Exclusive Residential District, Category 2 Low-rise Exclusive Residential District, Category 1 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential District, Category 2 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential District, Category 1 Residential District, Category 2 Residential District, Quasi-residential District, Countryside Residential District, Neighborhood Commercial District, Commercial District, Quasi-industrial District, Industrial District, Exclusive Industrial District, Special Use District, Special Use Restriction District, Exceptional Floor Area Ratio District, High-rise residential Attraction Districts, Height Control District, High-level Use District, Specified Block, Special Districts for Urban Renaissance, Guided Land Use Districts for Residential Environment Improvement, Special Use Attraction District, Fire Prevention District, Quasi-fire Prevention District, Specified Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zones or Landscape District as respectively set forth in Article 8, paragraph (1), items (i) through (vi) of the City Planning Act;
二十二　地区計画　都市計画法第十二条の四第一項第一号に掲げる地区計画をいう。
(xxii) district Plans: District Plans set forth in Article 12-4, paragraph (1), item (i) of the City Planning Act;
二十三　地区整備計画　都市計画法第十二条の五第二項第一号に掲げる地区整備計画をいう。
(xxiii) district Development Plans: District Development Plans set forth in Article 12-5, paragraph (2), item (i) of the City Planning Act;
二十四　防災街区整備地区計画　都市計画法第十二条の四第一項第二号に掲げる防災街区整備地区計画をいう。
(xxiv) disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone Plans: Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone Plans set forth in Article 12-4, paragraph (1), item (ii) of the City Planning Act;
二十五　特定建築物地区整備計画　密集市街地における防災街区の整備の促進に関する法律（平成九年法律第四十九号。以下「密集市街地整備法」という。）第三十二条第二項第一号に規定する特定建築物地区整備計画をいう。
(xxv) specified Building District Development Plans: Specified Building District Development Plans as provided for in Article 32, paragraph (2), item (i) of the Act on the Promotion of Disaster Prevention Block improvement in Concentrated Urban Areas (Act No. 49 of 1997, hereinafter referred to as "Concentrated Urban Areas Development Act");
二十六　防災街区整備地区整備計画　密集市街地整備法第三十二条第二項第二号に規定する防災街区整備地区整備計画をいう。
(xxvi) disaster Prevention Block Improvement District Development Plans: Disaster Prevention Block Improvement District Development Plans as provided for in Article 32, paragraph (2), item (ii) of the Concentrated Urban Areas Development Act;
二十七　歴史的風致維持向上地区計画　都市計画法第十二条の四第一項第三号に掲げる歴史的風致維持向上地区計画をいう。
(xxvii) historic Scenery Maintenance and Improvement District Plans: Historic Scenery Maintenance and Improvement District Plans set forth in Article 12-4, paragraph (1), item (iii) of the City Planning Act;
二十八　歴史的風致維持向上地区整備計画　地域における歴史的風致の維持及び向上に関する法律（平成二十年法律第四十号。以下「地域歴史的風致法」という。）第三十一条第二項第一号に規定する歴史的風致維持向上地区整備計画をいう。
(xxviii) historic Scenery Maintenance and Improvement District Plans: Historic Scenery Maintenance and Improvement District Plans as provided for in Article 31, paragraph (2), item (i) of the Act Concerning the Maintenance and Improvement of Historic Scenery (Act No. 40 of 2008; hereinafter referred to as the "Historic Scenery Act").;
二十九　沿道地区計画　都市計画法第十二条の四第一項第四号に掲げる沿道地区計画をいう。
(xxix) roadside District Plans: Roadside District Plans set forth in Article 12-4, paragraph (1), item (iv) of the City Planning Act;
三十　沿道地区整備計画　幹線道路の沿道の整備に関する法律（昭和五十五年法律第三十四号。以下「沿道整備法」という。）第九条第二項第一号に掲げる沿道地区整備計画をいう。
(xxx) roadside District Development Plans: Roadside District Development Plans set forth in Article 9, paragraph (2), item (i) of the Act Concerning the Improvement of the Areas along Trunk Roads (Act No. 34, 1980, hereinafter referred to as the Act on Improvement of Road Areas);
三十一　集落地区計画　都市計画法第十二条の四第一項第五号に掲げる集落地区計画をいう。
(xxxi) rural District Plans: Rural District Plans set forth in Article 12-4, paragraph (1), item (v) of the City Planning Act;
三十二　集落地区整備計画　集落地域整備法（昭和六十二年法律第六十三号）第五条第三項に規定する集落地区整備計画をいう。
(xxxii) rural Hamlet District Improvement Plans: Rural Hamlet District Improvement Plans as provided for in Article 5, paragraph (3) of the Rural Districts Improvement Act (Act No. 63 of 1987);
三十三　地区計画等　都市計画法第四条第九項に規定する地区計画等をいう。
(xxxiii) district Planning, etc.: District Planning, etc. as provided for in Article 4, paragraph (9) of the City Planning Act;
三十四　プログラム　電子計算機に対する指令であつて、一の結果を得ることができるように組み合わされたものをいう。
(xxxiv) program: Instructions to an electronic computer combined so that it is possible to obtain a single result;
三十五　特定行政庁　建築主事を置く市町村の区域については当該市町村の長をいい、その他の市町村の区域については都道府県知事をいう。ただし、第九十七条の二第一項又は第九十七条の三第一項の規定により建築主事を置く市町村の区域内の政令で定める建築物については、都道府県知事とする。
(xxxv) designated Administrative Agency: The head of a municipality for the area of the relevant municipality having building officials, or the prefectural governor for the area of other municipalities. Provided, however, that with respect to a building specified by Cabinet Order in the area of a municipality where there is a building official pursuant to Article 97-2, paragraph (1) or Article 97-3, paragraph (1), the prefectural governor.
（適用の除外）
(Exemption from Application)
第三条　この法律並びにこれに基づく命令及び条例の規定は、次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物については、適用しない。
Article 3  (1) The provisions of this Act, and orders and ordinances based thereon shall not apply to buildings coming under any of the following items:
一　文化財保護法（昭和二十五年法律第二百十四号）の規定によつて国宝、重要文化財、重要有形民俗文化財、特別史跡名勝天然記念物又は史跡名勝天然記念物として指定され、又は仮指定された建築物
(i) buildings designated or provisionally designated as national treasures, important cultural properties, important tangible folk-custom cultural properties, natural monuments in special historical places and popular scenic spots, or natural monuments in historical places and popular scenic spots under the Cultural Properties Protection Act (Act No. 214 of 1950);
二　旧重要美術品等の保存に関する法律（昭和八年法律第四十三号）の規定によつて重要美術品等として認定された建築物
(ii) buildings recognized as important works of art, etc. under the provisions of the old Act on Preservation of Important Art Objects (Act No. 43 of 1933);
三　文化財保護法第百八十二条第二項の条例その他の条例の定めるところにより現状変更の規制及び保存のための措置が講じられている建築物（次号において「保存建築物」という。）であつて、特定行政庁が建築審査会の同意を得て指定したもの
(iii) buildings for which measures have been taken to restrict their alteration from their present condition and to preserve them under the Ordinances based on the provisions of Article 182, paragraph (2) of the Cultural Properties Protection Act or other ordinances (referred to as "preserved buildings" in the following item), if the Designated Administrative Agency designates as such with the consent of the Building Review Council;
四　第一号若しくは第二号に掲げる建築物又は保存建築物であつたものの原形を再現する建築物で、特定行政庁が建築審査会の同意を得てその原形の再現がやむを得ないと認めたもの
(iv) buildings reproducing the original form of buildings which were formerly those buildings set forth in item (i) or (ii) or preserved buildings, if the Designated Administrative Agency concludes that the reproduction is indispensable with the consent of the Building Review Council.
２　この法律又はこれに基づく命令若しくは条例の規定の施行又は適用の際現に存する建築物若しくはその敷地又は現に建築、修繕若しくは模様替の工事中の建築物若しくはその敷地がこれらの規定に適合せず、又はこれらの規定に適合しない部分を有する場合においては、当該建築物、建築物の敷地又は建築物若しくはその敷地の部分に対しては、当該規定は、適用しない。
(2) If buildings which are actually existing or sites thereof, or the buildings under construction, repair or remodeling at the time or the sites thereof, of the enforcement or application of the provisions referred to in this Act, or orders or ordinances based thereon, do not conform to those provisions or have unconformable parts, the relevant provisions shall not apply to those buildings, sites of buildings, or the parts of those buildings or sites thereof.
３　前項の規定は、次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物、建築物の敷地又は建築物若しくはその敷地の部分に対しては、適用しない。
(3) The provision of the preceding paragraph shall not apply to buildings, sites of buildings, or the parts of buildings or sites thereof coming under any of the following items:
一　この法律又はこれに基づく命令若しくは条例を改正する法令による改正（この法律に基づく命令又は条例を廃止すると同時に新たにこれに相当する命令又は条例を制定することを含む。）後のこの法律又はこれに基づく命令若しくは条例の規定の適用の際当該規定に相当する従前の規定に違反している建築物、建築物の敷地又は建築物若しくはその敷地の部分
(i) buildings, sites of buildings, or parts of buildings or sites thereof which, in applying the provisions referred to in this Act, or orders or ordinances based thereon as amended (including cases where orders or ordinances based on this Act are abolished and at the same time new orders or ordinances corresponding thereto are put into force) by laws and orders amending this Act, or orders or ordinances based thereon, violate the former provisions corresponding to the amended ones;
二　都市計画区域若しくは準都市計画区域の指定若しくは変更、第一種低層住居専用地域、第二種低層住居専用地域、第一種中高層住居専用地域、第二種中高層住居専用地域、第一種住居地域、第二種住居地域、準住居地域、田園住居地域、近隣商業地域、商業地域、準工業地域、工業地域若しくは工業専用地域若しくは防火地域若しくは準防火地域に関する都市計画の決定若しくは変更、第四十二条第一項、第五十二条第二項第二号若しくは第三号若しくは第八項、第五十六条第一項第二号イ若しくは別表第三備考三の号の区域の指定若しくはその取消し又は第五十二条第一項第八号、第二項第三号若しくは第八項、第五十三条第一項第六号、第五十六条第一項第二号ニ若しくは別表第三（に）欄の五の項に掲げる数値の決定若しくは変更により、第四十三条第一項、第四十八条第一項から第十四項まで、第五十二条第一項、第二項、第七項若しくは第八項、第五十三条第一項から第三項まで、第五十四条第一項、第五十五条第一項、第五十六条第一項、第五十六条の二第一項若しくは第六十一条に規定する建築物、建築物の敷地若しくは建築物若しくはその敷地の部分に関する制限又は第四十三条第三項、第四十三条の二、第四十九条から第五十条まで若しくは第六十八条の九の規定に基づく条例に規定する建築物、建築物の敷地若しくは建築物若しくはその敷地の部分に関する制限に変更があつた場合における当該変更後の制限に相当する従前の制限に違反している建築物、建築物の敷地又は建築物若しくはその敷地の部分
(ii) buildings, sites of buildings, or parts of buildings or sites thereof which have violated that former restrictions relevant to revised restrictions as Article 43, paragraph (1); Article 48, paragraphs (1) through (14); Article 52, paragraph (1), (2), (7) or (8); Article 53, paragraphs (1) through (3); Article 54, paragraph (1); Article 55, paragraph (1); Article 56, paragraph (1); Article 56-2, paragraph (1); or Article 61: or the Ordinances under Article 43, paragraph (3); Article 43-2, Articles 49 through 50 or Article 68-9, in response to the designation or alteration of City Planning Area or Quasi-city Planning Area, or in response to the designation or alteration of city planning for Category 1 Low-rise Exclusive Residential District, Category 2 Low-rise Exclusive Residential District, Category 1 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential District, Category 2 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential District, Category 1 Residential District, Category 2 Residential District, Quasi-residential District, Countryside Residential District, Neighborhood Commercial District, Commercial District, Quasi-industrial District, Industrial Districts, Exclusive Industrial District, Fire Prevention District, or Quasi-fire Prevention District, or in response to the designation of the area under Article 42, paragraph (1); Article 52, paragraph (2), item (ii) or (iii), or paragraph (8); Article 56, paragraph (1), item (ii), (a), or remarks 3 of Appended Table 3 revocation thereof, or in response to the designation or alternation of value set forth in Article 52, paragraph (1), item (viii), paragraph (2), item (iii), or paragraph (8); Article 53, paragraph (1), item (vi), Article 56, paragraph (1), item (ii), (d) or column (d), row (5) of Appended Table 3;
三　工事の着手がこの法律又はこれに基づく命令若しくは条例の規定の施行又は適用の後である増築、改築、移転、大規模の修繕又は大規模の模様替に係る建築物又はその敷地
(iii) buildings or sites thereof of which construction work for addition, rebuilding, relocation, major repair, or major remodeling is started after the enforcement or application of the provisions referred to in Act, or orders or ordinances based thereon;
四　前号に該当する建築物又はその敷地の部分
(iv) parts of buildings or sites thereof coming under the preceding item;
五　この法律又はこれに基づく命令若しくは条例の規定に適合するに至つた建築物、建築物の敷地又は建築物若しくはその敷地の部分
(v) buildings, sites of buildings, or parts of buildings or sites thereof which become conformable to the provisions of this Act, or orders or ordinances based thereon.
（建築主事）
(Building Officials)
第四条　政令で指定する人口二十五万以上の市は、その長の指揮監督の下に、第六条第一項の規定による確認に関する事務をつかさどらせるために、建築主事を置かなければならない。
Article 4  (1) A city having a population of 250,000 or more as designated by Cabinet Order must appoint building officials to have them take charge of the affairs concerning confirmation under Article 6, paragraph (1) under the direction and supervision of its head.
２　市町村（前項の市を除く。）は、その長の指揮監督の下に、第六条第一項の規定による確認に関する事務をつかさどらせるために、建築主事を置くことができる。
(2) A city (excluding cities of the preceding paragraph), town or village may appoint building officials to have them take charge of the affairs concerning confirmation under Article 6, paragraph (1), under the direction and supervision of its head.
３　市町村は、前項の規定により建築主事を置こうとする場合においては、あらかじめ、その設置について、都道府県知事に協議しなければならない。
(3) When a municipality intends to appoint building officials pursuant to the preceding paragraph, it must engage in prior consultation with the prefectural governor and have an agreement with respect to the appointment.
４　市町村が前項の規定により協議して建築主事を置くときは、当該市町村の長は、建築主事が置かれる日の三十日前までにその旨を公示し、かつ、これを都道府県知事に通知しなければならない。
(4) When a municipality is to appoint building officials based on consultation pursuant to the preceding paragraph, the head of the relevant municipality must publicly notify to that effect at least thirty days before the day of appointment of building officials, and notify the prefectural governor thereof.
５　都道府県は、都道府県知事の指揮監督の下に、第一項又は第二項の規定によつて建築主事を置いた市町村（第九十七条の二を除き、以下「建築主事を置く市町村」という。）の区域外における建築物に係る第六条第一項の規定による確認に関する事務をつかさどらせるために、建築主事を置かなければならない。
(5) A prefecture must appoint building officials to have them take charge of affairs concerning confirmation under Article 6, paragraph (1) for buildings outside the area of a municipality having building officials under paragraph (1) or (2) (hereinafter referred to as a "municipality having building officials" except in Article 97-2), under the direction and supervision of its prefectural governor.
６　第一項、第二項及び前項の建築主事は、市町村又は都道府県の職員で第七十七条の五十八第一項の登録を受けた者のうちから、それぞれ市町村の長又は都道府県知事が命ずる。
(6) Building officials as specified in paragraphs (1), (2) and the preceding paragraph shall be appointed by the head of a municipality, or the prefectural governor respectively from among officials of the municipality or prefecture that have been registered in accordance with the provisions of Article 77-58, paragraph (1).
７　特定行政庁は、その所轄区域を分けて、その区域を所管する建築主事を指定することができる。
(7) The Designated Administrative Agency may divide its jurisdiction into several areas and may designate the building officials in charge of each area.
（建築基準適合判定資格者検定）
(Qualifying Examination for Building Regulation Conformity Inspectors)
第五条　建築基準適合判定資格者検定は、建築士の設計に係る建築物が第六条第一項の建築基準関係規定に適合するかどうかを判定するために必要な知識及び経験について行う。
Article 5  (1) The qualifying examination for building regulation conformity inspectors shall be conducted so as to check the knowledge and experience necessary to judge whether a building designed by a Kenchikushi conforms to the provisions related to building regulations in Article 6, paragraph (1).
２　建築基準適合判定資格者検定は、国土交通大臣が行う。
(2) The qualifying examination for building regulation conformity inspectors shall be conducted by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism.
３　建築基準適合判定資格者検定は、一級建築士試験に合格した者で、建築行政又は第七十七条の十八第一項の確認検査の業務その他これに類する業務で政令で定めるものに関して、二年以上の実務の経験を有するものでなければ受けることができない。
(3) No person shall be eligible for the qualifying examination for building regulation conformity inspectors unless the person is qualified as a 1st-class Kenchikushi, with two or more years of practical experience related to building administration or confirmation and inspection work in Article 77-18, paragraph (1) or other similar work specified by Cabinet Order.
４　建築基準適合判定資格者検定に関する事務をつかさどらせるために、国土交通省に、建築基準適合判定資格者検定委員を置く。ただし、次条第一項の指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関が同項の建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務を行う場合においては、この限りでない。
(4) Examiners of building regulation conformity inspectors shall be established at the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism for conducting works related to qualifying examination for building regulation conformity inspectors. Provided, however, that this shall not apply if the designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors provided for in paragraph (1) of the following Article performs the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors provided for in that paragraph.
５　建築基準適合判定資格者検定委員は、建築及び行政に関し学識経験のある者のうちから、国土交通大臣が命ずる。
(5) An examiner of building regulation conformity inspectors shall be appointed by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism from among persons having learning and experience in architecture and administration.
６　国土交通大臣は、不正の手段によつて建築基準適合判定資格者検定を受け、又は受けようとした者に対しては、合格の決定を取り消し、又はその建築基準適合判定資格者検定を受けることを禁止することができる。
(6) If a person has taken or has attempted to take a qualifying examination for building regulation conformity inspectors by illegal means, the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may cancel the qualification or prohibit that person from taking the relevant examination.
７　国土交通大臣は、前項又は次条第二項の規定による処分を受けた者に対し、情状により、二年以内の期間を定めて建築基準適合判定資格者検定を受けることができないものとすることができる。
(7) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may prohibit a person who has been penalized under the preceding paragraph or paragraph (2) of the next Article from taking the qualifying examination for building regulation conformity inspectors, depending on the circumstances, for a specified period of two years or less.
８　前各項に定めるものを除くほか、建築基準適合判定資格者検定の手続及び基準その他建築基準適合判定資格者検定に関し必要な事項は、政令で定める。
(8) In addition to the provisions of the preceding paragraphs, procedures and criteria and other necessary items for the qualifying examination for building regulation conformity inspectors shall be specified by Cabinet Order.
（建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務を行う者の指定）
(Designation of a Person Performing the Qualifying Examination Affairs for Building Regulation Conformity Inspectors)
第五条の二　国土交通大臣は、第七十七条の二から第七十七条の五までの規定の定めるところにより指定する者（以下「指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関」という。）に、建築基準適合判定資格者検定の実施に関する事務（以下「建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務」という。）を行わせることができる。
Article 5-2  (1) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may have a person (hereinafter referred to as "the designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors") designated in accordance with the provisions referred to in Articles 77-2 through 77-5 to perform affairs relating to the implementation of qualifying examination for building regulation conformity inspectors (hereinafter referred to as "qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors").
２　指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関は、前条第六項に規定する国土交通大臣の職権を行うことができる。
(2) The designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors may exercise the authority of the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism as provided for in paragraph (6) of the preceding Article.
３　国土交通大臣は、第一項の規定による指定をしたときは、建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務を行わないものとする。
(3) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism shall not perform qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors when the designation under paragraph (1) has been performed.
（受検手数料）
(Examination Fee)
第五条の三　建築基準適合判定資格者検定を受けようとする者（市町村又は都道府県の職員である者を除く。）は、政令で定めるところにより、実費を勘案して政令で定める額の受検手数料を、国（指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関が行う建築基準適合判定資格者検定を受けようとする者にあつては、指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関）に納めなければならない。
Article 5-3  (1) A person taking the qualifying examination for building regulation conformity inspectors (excluding the officials of a city, town, village, or prefecture) shall pay an examination fee specified by Cabinet Order in consideration of actual costs to the national government (or to a designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors if the examination conducted by a designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors will be taken), as specified by Cabinet Order.
２　前項の規定により指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関に納められた受検手数料は、当該指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関の収入とする。
(2) Examination fee paid to the designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors pursuant to the preceding paragraph shall be income for that designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors.
（構造計算適合判定資格者検定）
(Qualifying Examination for Structural Calculation Conformity Inspectors)
第五条の四　構造計算適合判定資格者検定は、建築士の設計に係る建築物の計画について第六条の三第一項の構造計算適合性判定を行うために必要な知識及び経験について行う。
Article 5-4  (1) The qualifying examination for structural calculation conformity inspectors shall be conducted with the knowledge and experience necessary to carry out structural calculation conformity reviews in Article 6-3, paragraph (1) for a plan for the building based on a design by a Kenchikushi.
２　構造計算適合判定資格者検定は、国土交通大臣が行う。
(2) The qualifying examination for structural calculation conformity inspectors shall be conducted by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism.
３　構造計算適合判定資格者検定は、一級建築士試験に合格した者で、第六条の三第一項の構造計算適合性判定の業務その他これに類する業務で政令で定めるものに関して、五年以上の実務の経験を有するものでなければ受けることができない。
(3) No person shall be eligible to take the qualifying examination for structural calculation conformity inspectors unless the person is qualified as a 1st-class Kenchikushi, with five or more years of practical experience related to structural calculation conformity reviews in Article 6-3, paragraph (1) or similar work specified by Cabinet Order.
４　構造計算適合判定資格者検定に関する事務をつかさどらせるために、国土交通省に、構造計算適合判定資格者検定委員を置く。ただし、次条第一項の指定構造計算適合判定資格者検定機関が同項の構造計算適合判定資格者検定事務を行う場合においては、この限りでない。
(4) A committee of examiners of qualified structural calculation conformity inspectors shall be established at the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism with responsibility for administrative tasks relating to the qualifying examination for structural calculation conformity inspectors. Provided, however, that this shall not apply if a designated structural calculation conformity review body in paragraph (1) of the following Article conducts qualifying examination affairs for structural calculation conformity inspectors in that paragraph.
５　第五条第五項の規定は構造計算適合判定資格者検定委員に、同条第六項から第八項までの規定は構造計算適合判定資格者検定について準用する。この場合において、同条第七項中「次条第二項」とあるのは、「第五条の五第二項において準用する第五条の二第二項」と読み替えるものとする。
(5) The provisions of Article 5, paragraph (5) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the committee of examiners of qualified structural calculation conformity inspectors, and the provisions of Article 5, paragraphs (6) through (8) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the qualifying examination for structural calculation conformity inspectors. In this case, references to "paragraph (2) of the following Article" in Article 5, paragraph (7) shall be read as "Article 5-2, paragraph (2) applied mutatis mutandis to Article 5-5, paragraph (2)".
（構造計算適合判定資格者検定事務を行う者の指定等）
(Designation of a Person Performing the Qualifying Examination Affairs for Qualified Structural Calculation Conformity Inspectors)
第五条の五　国土交通大臣は、第七十七条の十七の二第一項及び同条第二項において準用する第七十七条の三から第七十七条の五までの規定の定めるところにより指定する者（以下「指定構造計算適合判定資格者検定機関」という。）に、構造計算適合判定資格者検定の実施に関する事務（以下「構造計算適合判定資格者検定事務」という。）を行わせることができる。
Article 5-5  (1) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may have a person designated in accordance with the provisions referred to in Articles 77-3 through 77-5 applied mutatis mutandis to Article 77-17-2, paragraphs (1) and (2) (hereinafter referred to as "the designated qualifying examination body for structural calculation conformity inspectors") to perform affairs relating to the implementation of qualifying examinations for structural calculation conformity inspectors (hereinafter referred to as "the qualifying examination affairs for structural calculation conformity inspectors").
２　第五条の二第二項及び第五条の三第二項の規定は指定構造計算適合判定資格者検定機関に、第五条の二第三項の規定は構造計算適合判定資格者検定事務に、第五条の三第一項の規定は構造計算適合判定資格者検定について準用する。この場合において、第五条の二第二項中「前条第六項」とあるのは「第五条の四第五項において準用する第五条第六項」と、同条第三項中「第一項」とあるのは「第五条の五第一項」と、第五条の三第一項中「者（市町村又は都道府県の職員である者を除く。）」とあるのは「者」と読み替えるものとする。
(2) The provisions of Article 5-2, paragraphs (2) and Article 5-3, paragraph (2) shall apply to the designated qualifying examination body for structural calculation conformity inspectors, the provisions of Article 5-2, paragraph (3) to the qualifying examination affairs for structural calculation conformity inspectors, and the provisions of Article 5-3, paragraph (1) to qualified structural calculation conformity inspectors, mutatis mutandis. In this case, "paragraph (6) of the preceding Article" in Article 5-2, paragraph (2) shall be read as "Article 5, paragraph (6) applied mutatis mutandis in Article 5-4, paragraph (5)", "paragraph (1)" in paragraph (3) of this Article as "Article 5-5, paragraph (1)", and "person (excluding the officials of a city, town, village, or prefecture)" in Article 5-3, paragraph (1) as "person".
（建築物の設計及び工事監理）
(Design of Buildings and Construction Administration)
第五条の六　建築士法第三条第一項（同条第二項の規定により適用される場合を含む。以下同じ。）、第三条の二第一項（同条第二項において準用する同法第三条第二項の規定により適用される場合を含む。以下同じ。）若しくは第三条の三第一項（同条第二項において準用する同法第三条第二項の規定により適用される場合を含む。以下同じ。）に規定する建築物又は同法第三条の二第三項（同法第三条の三第二項において読み替えて準用する場合を含む。以下同じ。）の規定に基づく条例に規定する建築物の工事は、それぞれ当該各条に規定する建築士の設計によらなければ、することができない。
Article 5-6  (1) Construction work for buildings as specified in Article 3, paragraph (1) (including cases where it is applied pursuant to the paragraph (2) of that Article; the same applies hereinafter), Article 3-2, paragraph (1) (including cases where it is applied pursuant to Article 3, paragraph (2) applied mutatis mutandis in Article 3-2, paragraph (2); the same applies hereinafter) or Article 3-3, paragraph (1) (including cases where it is applied pursuant to Article 3, paragraph (2) applied mutatis mutandis in Article 3-3, paragraph (2); the same applies hereinafter) of the Act on Architects and Building Engineers or buildings as specified in ordinances under the provisions of Article 3-2, paragraph (3) of the same Act (including cases where it shall be read as mutatis mutandis in Article 3-3, paragraph (2) of the same Act and applied; the same applies hereinafter) shall not be executed unless those buildings are designed by Kenchikushi as specified on the relevant provisions of those Articles.
２　建築士法第二条第七項に規定する構造設計図書による同法第二十条の二第一項の建築物の工事は、構造設計一級建築士の構造設計（同法第二条第七項に規定する構造設計をいう。以下この項及び次条第三項第二号において同じ。）又は当該建築物が構造関係規定に適合することを構造設計一級建築士が確認した構造設計によらなければ、することができない。
(2) Construction work for buildings under Article 20-2, paragraph (1) of the Act on Architects and Building Engineers based on structural drawings/specifications as specified in Article 2, paragraph (7) of the same Act shall not be executed unless it is based on structural design by a Structural Design 1st-class Kenchikushi (refers to structural design specified in Article 2, paragraph (7) of the same Act; the same hereinafter in the remainder of this Article and paragraph (3), item (ii) in the following Article) or on a structural design for which a Structural Design 1st-class Kenchikushi has confirmed that the relevant building conforms to structure-related provisions.
３　建築士法第二条第七項に規定する設備設計図書による同法第二十条の三第一項の建築物の工事は、設備設計一級建築士の設備設計（同法第二条第七項に規定する設備設計をいう。以下この項及び次条第三項第三号において同じ。）又は当該建築物が設備関係規定に適合することを設備設計一級建築士が確認した設備設計によらなければ、することができない。
(3) Construction work for buildings under Article 20-3, paragraph (1) of the Act on Architects and Building Engineers based on equipment drawings/specifications specified in Article 2, paragraph (7) of the same Act shall not be executed unless it is based on MEP design by an MEP Design 1st-class Kenchikushi (refers to MEP design specified in Article 2, paragraph (7) of the same Act; the same hereinafter in the remainder of this Article and paragraph (3), item (iii) in the following Article) or on an MEP design for which an MEP Design 1st-class Kenchikushi has confirmed that the relevant building conforms to MEP-related provisions.
４　建築主は、第一項に規定する工事をする場合においては、それぞれ建築士法第三条第一項、第三条の二第一項若しくは第三条の三第一項に規定する建築士又は同法第三条の二第三項の規定に基づく条例に規定する建築士である工事監理者を定めなければならない。
(4) When construction work as specified in paragraph (1) is to be executed, the building owner concerned must designate a person who conducts construction administration and is qualified as Kenchikushi as specified in Articles 3 through 3-3 of the Act on Architects and Building Engineers.
５　前項の規定に違反した工事は、することができない。
(5) Construction work in violation of the provision of the preceding paragraph shall not be executed.
（建築物の建築等に関する申請及び確認）
(Application for and Confirmation of Construction of Buildings)
第六条　建築主は、第一号から第三号までに掲げる建築物を建築しようとする場合（増築しようとする場合においては、建築物が増築後において第一号から第三号までに掲げる規模のものとなる場合を含む。）、これらの建築物の大規模の修繕若しくは大規模の模様替をしようとする場合又は第四号に掲げる建築物を建築しようとする場合においては、当該工事に着手する前に、その計画が建築基準関係規定（この法律並びにこれに基づく命令及び条例の規定（以下「建築基準法令の規定」という。）その他建築物の敷地、構造又は建築設備に関する法律並びにこれに基づく命令及び条例の規定で政令で定めるものをいう。以下同じ。）に適合するものであることについて、確認の申請書を提出して建築主事の確認を受け、確認済証の交付を受けなければならない。当該確認を受けた建築物の計画の変更（国土交通省令で定める軽微な変更を除く。）をして、第一号から第三号までに掲げる建築物を建築しようとする場合（増築しようとする場合においては、建築物が増築後において第一号から第三号までに掲げる規模のものとなる場合を含む。）、これらの建築物の大規模の修繕若しくは大規模の模様替をしようとする場合又は第四号に掲げる建築物を建築しようとする場合も、同様とする。
Article 6  (1) When a building owner intends to construct any building set forth in items (i) through (iii) (in the case of addition, including cases where a building has such scale set forth in items (i) through (iii) after the addition), intends to execute major repair or major remodeling of the building, or intends to construct a building set forth in item (iv), the building owner must submit an application for confirmation that the plan concerned conforms to the provisions related to building regulation (the provisions of this Act, and orders and ordinances based thereon (hereinafter referred to as "provisions of building standard laws and regulations"), and in addition, other provisions of laws concerning sites, construction, and equipment for buildings, orders and ordinances based thereon, those of which specified by Cabinet Order; the same applies hereinafter), obtain that confirmation from the building official and receive a certificate of completion for confirmation prior to starting the relevant construction work. This shall also apply when a plan for the building that received the relevant confirmation is to be revised (excluding minor revisions specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order) to construct the building set forth in items (i) through (iii) (in the case of addition, including those which scale becomes set forth in items (i) through (iii) after the addition), or when major repair or remodeling work of the building is to be executed, or the building set forth in item (iv) is to be constructed.
一　別表第一（い）欄に掲げる用途に供する特殊建築物で、その用途に供する部分の床面積の合計が二百平方メートルを超えるもの
(i) special buildings for use set forth in column (a) of Appended Table 1, of which parts for that use have an aggregate of floor areas exceeding 200 square meters;
二　木造の建築物で三以上の階数を有し、又は延べ面積が五百平方メートル、高さが十三メートル若しくは軒の高さが九メートルを超えるもの
(ii) wooden buildings which have three or more stories, or have a total floor area exceeding 500 square meters, or those exceeding 13 meters in height, or those with height of eaves exceeding 9 meters;
三　木造以外の建築物で二以上の階数を有し、又は延べ面積が二百平方メートルを超えるもの
(iii) buildings other than wooden buildings, which have two or more stories or have a total floor area exceeding 200 square meters;
四　前三号に掲げる建築物を除くほか、都市計画区域若しくは準都市計画区域（いずれも都道府県知事が都道府県都市計画審議会の意見を聴いて指定する区域を除く。）若しくは景観法（平成十六年法律第百十号）第七十四条第一項の準景観地区（市町村長が指定する区域を除く。）内又は都道府県知事が関係市町村の意見を聴いてその区域の全部若しくは一部について指定する区域内における建築物
(iv) in addition to the buildings set forth in the preceding three items, buildings in City Planning Areas or Quasi-city Planning Areas (excluding areas to be designated by the prefectural governor upon hearing the opinion of the Prefectural City Planning Council), in Quasi-landscape Districts under the Scenery Act (Act No. 110 of 2004) Article 74, paragraph (1) (excluding districts specified by the mayor of municipality), or in areas designated in whole or in part by the prefectural governors upon hearing the opinions of the concerned municipality.
２　前項の規定は、防火地域及び準防火地域外において建築物を増築し、改築し、又は移転しようとする場合で、その増築、改築又は移転に係る部分の床面積の合計が十平方メートル以内であるときについては、適用しない。
(2) The provisions in the preceding paragraph shall not apply in the case of addition, rebuilding, or relocation of a building outside a Fire Prevention District or a Quasi-fire Prevention District if the part of the building to be added, rebuilt, or relocated has an aggregate of floor areas of 10 square meters or less.
３　建築主事は、第一項の申請書が提出された場合において、その計画が次の各号のいずれかに該当するときは、当該申請書を受理することができない。
(3) If an application as mentioned in paragraph (1) has been submitted, the building official shall not receive the relevant application if the plan concerned comes under any of the following items:
一　建築士法第三条第一項、第三条の二第一項、第三条の三第一項、第二十条の二第一項若しくは第二十条の三第一項の規定又は同法第三条の二第三項の規定に基づく条例の規定に違反するとき。
(i) when it violates provisions of Article 3, paragraph (1), Article 3-2, paragraph (1), Article 3-3, paragraph (1), Article 20-2, paragraph (1) or Article 20-3, paragraph (1) of the Act on Architects and Building Engineers or provisions of ordinances based on provisions of Article 3-2, paragraph (3) of the same Act;
二　構造設計一級建築士以外の一級建築士が建築士法第二十条の二第一項の建築物の構造設計を行つた場合において、当該建築物が構造関係規定に適合することを構造設計一級建築士が確認した構造設計によるものでないとき。
(ii) when, in a case where a 1st-class Kenchikushi other than a Structural Design 1st-class Kenchikushi performed the structural design of a building under Article 20-2, paragraph (1) of the Act on Architects and Building Engineers, the plan is not based on a structural design for which a Structural Design 1st-class Kenchikushi has confirmed that the relevant building conforms to structure-related provisions;
三　設備設計一級建築士以外の一級建築士が建築士法第二十条の三第一項の建築物の設備設計を行つた場合において、当該建築物が設備関係規定に適合することを設備設計一級建築士が確認した設備設計によるものでないとき。
(iii) when, in a case where a 1st-class Kenchikushi other than an MEP design 1st-class Kenchikushi performed the MEP design of a building under Article 20-3, paragraph (1) of the Act on Architects and Building Engineers, the plan is not based on an MEP design for which an MEP Design 1st-class Kenchikushi has confirmed that the relevant building conforms to MEP-related provisions;
４　建築主事は、第一項の申請書を受理した場合においては、同項第一号から第三号までに係るものにあつてはその受理した日から三十五日以内に、同項第四号に係るものにあつてはその受理した日から七日以内に、申請に係る建築物の計画が建築基準関係規定に適合するかどうかを審査し、審査の結果に基づいて建築基準関係規定に適合することを確認したときは、当該申請者に確認済証を交付しなければならない。
(4) When a building official has received an application under paragraph (1), the building official shall examine the plan for the building concerned as to whether it conforms to the provisions related to building regulation, and if the building official confirms as a result of the examination, that it conforms to the provisions related to building regulation, the building official must issue a certificate of completion of confirmation to the relevant applicant within thirty-five days from the day of receipt in the case of buildings as mentioned in items (i) through (iii) of that paragraph, or within seven days from the day of receipt in the case of buildings as mentioned in item (iv) of that paragraph.
５　建築主事は、前項の場合において、申請に係る建築物の計画が第六条の三第一項の構造計算適合性判定を要するものであるときは、建築主から同条第七項の適合判定通知書又はその写しの提出を受けた場合に限り、第一項の規定による確認をすることができる。
(5) If plan for the buildings relating to the application require the structural calculation conformity review in Article 6-3, paragraph (1), under the case of the preceding paragraph, the building official shall be able to carry out confirmation under paragraph (1) only if a conformity review notice or a copy thereof have been submitted by the building owner.
６　建築主事は、第四項の場合（申請に係る建築物の計画が第六条の三第一項の特定構造計算基準（第二十条第一項第二号イの政令で定める基準に従つた構造計算で同号イに規定する方法によるものによつて確かめられる安全性を有することに係る部分に限る。）に適合するかどうかを審査する場合その他国土交通省令で定める場合に限る。）において、第四項の期間内に当該申請者に第一項の確認済証を交付することができない合理的な理由があるときは、三十五日の範囲内において、第四項の期間を延長することができる。この場合においては、その旨及びその延長する期間並びにその期間を延長する理由を記載した通知書を同項の期間内に当該申請者に交付しなければならない。
(6) In the case in paragraph (4) (limited to those for which a review to be performed as to whether the plan for the building in the application conforms to the designated structural calculation standards (limited to parts relating to the safety that can be confirmed by structural calculations in accordance with the standards specified by Cabinet Order referred to in Article 20, paragraph (1) item (ii), (a), using the method provided for in (a) of that item) and other cases specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order) and other cases specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order), if there are reasonable grounds why the building official cannot issue the certificate of completion of confirmation in paragraph (1) to the relevant applicant within the period in paragraph (4), the building official may extend the period in paragraph (4) within a range of thirty-five days. In this case, the building official must issue a written notice stating this fact and the period of the extension, and the reason for the extension of the period to the relevant applicant within the period in that paragraph.
７　建築主事は、第四項の場合において、申請に係る建築物の計画が建築基準関係規定に適合しないことを認めたとき、又は建築基準関係規定に適合するかどうかを決定することができない正当な理由があるときは、その旨及びその理由を記載した通知書を同項の期間（前項の規定により第四項の期間を延長した場合にあつては、当該延長後の期間）内に当該申請者に交付しなければならない。
(7) In the case of paragraph (4), if the building official concludes that the plan for the building in the application does not conform to the provisions related to building regulation, or if there are justifiable reasons to be unable to decide whether it conforms to the provisions related to building regulation, the building official must issue a written notice stating this fact and the reasons to the relevant applicant within the period in that paragraph (when the period in paragraph (4) has been extended pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the period after the relevant extension).
８　第一項の確認済証の交付を受けた後でなければ、同項の建築物の建築、大規模の修繕又は大規模の模様替の工事は、することができない。
(8) The construction, major repair, or major remodeling of a building as specified in paragraph (1) shall not be executed until the certificate of completion of confirmation specified in that paragraph has been issued.
９　第一項の規定による確認の申請書、同項の確認済証並びに第六項及び第七項の通知書の様式は、国土交通省令で定める。
(9) Forms of the application for confirmation under paragraph (1) and of the certificate of completion of confirmation specified in that paragraph, and the written notice specified in paragraphs (6) and (7) shall be specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（国土交通大臣等の指定を受けた者による確認）
(Confirmation by a Person Designated by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism)
第六条の二　前条第一項各号に掲げる建築物の計画（前条第三項各号のいずれかに該当するものを除く。）が建築基準関係規定に適合するものであることについて、第七十七条の十八から第七十七条の二十一までの規定の定めるところにより国土交通大臣又は都道府県知事が指定した者の確認を受け、国土交通省令で定めるところにより確認済証の交付を受けたときは、当該確認は前条第一項の規定による確認と、当該確認済証は同項の確認済証とみなす。
Article 6-2  (1) When the conformity of the plan for the building set forth in each item of paragraph (1) of the preceding Article (excluding cases come under any one of the items in paragraph (3) of the preceding Article) with the provisions related to building regulation is confirmed by a person that was designated by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or a prefectural governor in accordance with the provisions referred to in Articles 77-18 through 77-21, and a certificate of completion of confirmation is issued as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, the relevant confirmation shall be considered equivalent to a confirmation under paragraph (1) of the preceding Article and the relevant certificate of completion of confirmation shall be considered equivalent to the certificate of completion of confirmation specified in that paragraph.
２　前項の規定による指定は、二以上の都道府県の区域において同項の規定による確認の業務を行おうとする者を指定する場合にあつては国土交通大臣が、一の都道府県の区域において同項の規定による確認の業務を行おうとする者を指定する場合にあつては都道府県知事がするものとする。
(2) The designation under the preceding paragraph shall be performed by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism if the person to be designated performs confirmation work under that paragraph within an area encompassing two or more prefectures, or by a prefectural governor involving a single prefecture.
３　第一項の規定による指定を受けた者は、同項の規定による確認の申請を受けた場合において、申請に係る建築物の計画が次条第一項の構造計算適合性判定を要するものであるときは、建築主から同条第七項の適合判定通知書又はその写しの提出を受けた場合に限り、第一項の規定による確認をすることができる。
(3) When a person that has been designated under paragraph (1) has received an application for confirmation under paragraph, and the plan for the buildings relating to the application need to undergo the structural calculation conformity review as provided for in paragraph (1) of the following Article, confirmation may be carried out under paragraph (1) provided that the building owner has submitted a conformity review notice or a copy thereof under the provisions of paragraph (7) of that Article.
４　第一項の規定による指定を受けた者は、同項の規定による確認の申請を受けた場合において、申請に係る建築物の計画が建築基準関係規定に適合しないことを認めたとき、又は建築基準関係規定に適合するかどうかを決定することができない正当な理由があるときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、その旨及びその理由を記載した通知書を当該申請者に交付しなければならない。
(4) When a person designated under paragraph (1) has received an application for the confirmation under that paragraph concludes that the plan for the building in the application does not conform to the provisions related to building regulation, or if there are justifiable grounds to be unable to decide whether it conforms to the provisions related to building regulation, the relevant person must issue a written notice stating this fact and the reasons to the relevant applicant as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
５　第一項の規定による指定を受けた者は、同項の確認済証又は前項の通知書の交付をしたときは、国土交通省令で定める期間内に、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、確認審査報告書を作成し、当該確認済証又は当該通知書の交付に係る建築物の計画に関する国土交通省令で定める書類を添えて、これを特定行政庁に提出しなければならない。
(5) When a person designated under paragraph (1) issues the certificate of completion of confirmation in that paragraph or a written notice in the preceding paragraph, within a period specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, the relevant person must prepare a confirmation examination report and attach documents concerning the plan for the building specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order related to the relevant certificate of completion of confirmation or the relevant written notice and must submit it to the Designated Administrative Agency, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
６　特定行政庁は、前項の規定による確認審査報告書の提出を受けた場合において、第一項の確認済証の交付を受けた建築物の計画が建築基準関係規定に適合しないと認めるときは、当該建築物の建築主及び当該確認済証を交付した同項の規定による指定を受けた者にその旨を通知しなければならない。この場合において、当該確認済証は、その効力を失う。
(6) When the Designated Administrative Agency receives the submission of the confirmation examination report under the preceding paragraph, it finds that the plan for the building which received the certificate of completion of confirmation specified in paragraph (1) does not conform to the provisions related to building regulation, it must notify the information to the owner of the relevant building and the person who issued the relevant the certificate of completion of confirmation and has been designated under that paragraph to that effect. In this case, the relevant certificate of completion of confirmation shall cease to be effective.
７　前項の場合において、特定行政庁は、必要に応じ、第九条第一項又は第十項の命令その他の措置を講ずるものとする。
(7) The Designated Administrative Agency shall issue the order in Article 9, paragraph (1) or (10), or take other measures, under the case of the preceding paragraph, as necessary.
（構造計算適合性判定）
(Structural Calculation Conformity Review)
第六条の三　建築主は、第六条第一項の場合において、申請に係る建築物の計画が第二十条第一項第二号若しくは第三号に定める基準（同項第二号イ又は第三号イの政令で定める基準に従つた構造計算で、同項第二号イに規定する方法若しくはプログラムによるもの又は同項第三号イに規定するプログラムによるものによつて確かめられる安全性を有することに係る部分に限る。以下「特定構造計算基準」という。）又は第三条第二項（第八十六条の九第一項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定により第二十条の規定の適用を受けない建築物について第八十六条の七第一項の政令で定める範囲内において増築若しくは改築をする場合における同項の政令で定める基準（特定構造計算基準に相当する基準として政令で定めるものに限る。以下「特定増改築構造計算基準」という。）に適合するかどうかの確認審査（第六条第四項に規定する審査又は前条第一項の規定による確認のための審査をいう。以下この項において同じ。）を要するものであるときは、構造計算適合性判定（当該建築物の計画が特定構造計算基準又は特定増改築構造計算基準に適合するかどうかの判定をいう。以下同じ。）の申請書を提出して都道府県知事の構造計算適合性判定を受けなければならない。ただし、当該建築物の計画が特定構造計算基準（第二十条第一項第二号イの政令で定める基準に従つた構造計算で同号イに規定する方法によるものによつて確かめられる安全性を有することに係る部分のうち確認審査が比較的容易にできるものとして政令で定めるものに限る。）又は特定増改築構造計算基準（確認審査が比較的容易にできるものとして政令で定めるものに限る。）に適合するかどうかを、構造計算に関する高度の専門的知識及び技術を有する者として国土交通省令で定める要件を備える者である建築主事が第六条第四項に規定する審査をする場合又は前条第一項の規定による指定を受けた者が当該国土交通省令で定める要件を備える者である第七十七条の二十四第一項の確認検査員に前条第一項の規定による確認のための審査をさせる場合は、この限りでない。
Article 6-3  (1) In the case of Article 6, paragraph (1), if the plans for the building covered by an application require confirmation examination (defined as an examination specified in Article 6, paragraph (4) or examination for the confirmation under paragraph (1) of the preceding Article: same shall apply below in this paragraph) to ascertain whether or not they comply with the standards provided for in Article 20, paragraph (1), item (ii) or (iii) (limited to structural calculations that conform to the standards provided for in item (ii), (a) or (iii), (a) of that paragraph, and limited to those parts for which safety can be confirmed by means of a method or program as provided for in item (ii), (a) of that paragraph, or by means of the program provided for in item (iii), (a) of that paragraph, hereinafter referred to as "designated structural calculation standards") or the standards provided for in Article 86-7, paragraph (1) in the case of additions or remodeling within the scope specified by Cabinet Order in that Article (limited to standards specified by Cabinet Order as designated structural calculation standards, hereinafter referred to as "designated structural calculation standards for additions and remodeling") in the case of a building to which the provisions referred to in Article 20 do not apply pursuant to the provisions of Article 3, paragraph (2) (including cases in which the provisions apply to Article 86-9, paragraph (1), mutatis mutandis), the building owner shall submit an application for a structural calculation conformity review (defined as a judgement to ascertain whether the plan for the relevant buildings conform to the designated structural calculation standards or the designated structural calculation standards for additions and remodeling; the same applies hereinafter) and obtain a structural calculation conformity review by a prefectural governor. Provided, however, that these requirements shall not apply if a building official satisfying requirements specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order as a person who possesses advanced specialist knowledge and technology pertaining to structural calculations conducts review specified in Article 6, paragraph 4 or having a building inspector as defined in Article 77-24, paragraph (1) who has been designated under paragraph (1) of the preceding Article and meets the conditions specified by the relevant Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order conduct confirmation examination under paragraph (1) of the preceding Article whether or not the plans for the relevant building conform to the designated structural calculation standards (limited to parts relating to safety characteristics that can be confirmed by structural calculations in accordance with the standards specified by Cabinet Order referred to in Article 20, paragraph (1) item (ii), (a), using the method provided for in that item, and which are specified by Cabinet Order as the parts for which the confirmation examination is relatively simple) or the designated structural calculation standards for additions and remodeling (limited to those for which confirmation evaluations are relatively simple).
２　都道府県知事は、前項の申請書を受理した場合において、申請に係る建築物の計画が建築基準関係規定に適合するものであることについて当該都道府県に置かれた建築主事が第六条第一項の規定による確認をするときは、当該建築主事を当該申請に係る構造計算適合性判定に関する事務に従事させてはならない。
(2) If a prefectural governor receives an application as defined in the preceding paragraph, and a building official in the relevant prefecture will carry out a review under Article 6, paragraph (1) concerning the conformity of the plans for the building covered by the relevant application with the relevant building standards, the governor must not allow the relevant building official to engage in affairs relating to the structural calculation conformity review pertaining to the relevant application.
３　都道府県知事は、特別な構造方法の建築物の計画について第一項の構造計算適合性判定を行うに当たつて必要があると認めるときは、当該構造方法に係る構造計算に関して専門的な識見を有する者の意見を聴くものとする。
(3) If a prefectural governor finds that it is necessary to review the structural calculation conformity review under the provisions of paragraph (1) in the case of plans for a building in which a special structural method will be used, the governor shall seek the opinion of a person with specialist knowledge of structural calculations pertaining to the relevant structural method.
４　都道府県知事は、第一項の申請書を受理した場合においては、その受理した日から十四日以内に、当該申請に係る構造計算適合性判定の結果を記載した通知書を当該申請者に交付しなければならない。
(4) If a prefectural governor receives an application as defined in paragraph (1), the governor must issue a written notice to the applicant within 14 days from the date on which the relevant application was received, stating the results of the structural calculation conformity review pertaining to the relevant application.
５　都道府県知事は、前項の場合（申請に係る建築物の計画が特定構造計算基準（第二十条第一項第二号イの政令で定める基準に従つた構造計算で同号イに規定する方法によるものによつて確かめられる安全性を有することに係る部分に限る。）に適合するかどうかの判定の申請を受けた場合その他国土交通省令で定める場合に限る。）において、前項の期間内に当該申請者に同項の通知書を交付することができない合理的な理由があるときは、三十五日の範囲内において、同項の期間を延長することができる。この場合においては、その旨及びその延長する期間並びにその期間を延長する理由を記載した通知書を同項の期間内に当該申請者に交付しなければならない。
(5) In the case of the preceding paragraph (limited to those for which an application for a review is received to ascertain whether the plan for the building specified in the application conforms to the designated structural calculation standards conforms to the designated structural calculation standards (limited to parts relating to the safety that can be confirmed by structural calculations in accordance with the standards specified by Cabinet Order referred to in Article 20, paragraph (1) item (ii), (a), using the method provided for in (a) of that item) and other cases specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order), if there are reasonable grounds why the prefectural governor cannot issue the notice in that paragraph to the relevant applicant within the period in the preceding paragraph, the period provided for in the preceding paragraph may be extended to 35 days. In this case, the prefectural governor must issue a written notice stating this fact and the period of the extension, and the reason for the extension of the period to the relevant applicant within the period in that paragraph.
６　都道府県知事は、第四項の場合において、申請書の記載によつては当該建築物の計画が特定構造計算基準又は特定増改築構造計算基準に適合するかどうかを決定することができない正当な理由があるときは、その旨及びその理由を記載した通知書を同項の期間（前項の規定により第四項の期間を延長した場合にあつては、当該延長後の期間）内に当該申請者に交付しなければならない。
(6) In the case of paragraph (4), if there are justifiable grounds to be unable to decide whether the plan for the building conform to the designated structural calculation standards or the designated structural calculation standards for additions and remodeling based on information in an application, the prefectural governor must issue a written notice stating this fact and the reasons to the relevant applicant within the period in that paragraph (when the period in paragraph (4) has been extended pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the period after the relevant extension).
７　建築主は、第四項の規定により同項の通知書の交付を受けた場合において、当該通知書が適合判定通知書（当該建築物の計画が特定構造計算基準又は特定増改築構造計算基準に適合するものであると判定された旨が記載された通知書をいう。以下同じ。）であるときは、第六条第一項又は前条第一項の規定による確認をする建築主事又は同項の規定による指定を受けた者に、当該適合判定通知書又はその写しを提出しなければならない。ただし、当該建築物の計画に係る第六条第七項又は前条第四項の通知書の交付を受けた場合は、この限りでない。
(7) If a building owner is issued with a written notice pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (4) and the relevant written notice is a conformity review notice (a written notice stating that the plans for the relevant building has been judged to conform to the designated structural calculation standards or the designated structural calculation standards for additions and remodeling; the same applies hereinafter), a copy of the relevant conformity review notice must be submitted to the building official that will carry out the review under Article 6, paragraph (1) or paragraph (1) of the preceding Article, or to a person designated under that paragraph. Provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply if a written notice pertaining to the plans for the relevant building has been issued under the provisions of Article 6, paragraph (7) or paragraph (4) of the preceding Article.
８　建築主は、前項の場合において、建築物の計画が第六条第一項の規定による建築主事の確認に係るものであるときは、同条第四項の期間（同条第六項の規定により同条第四項の期間が延長された場合にあつては、当該延長後の期間）の末日の三日前までに、前項の適合判定通知書又はその写しを当該建築主事に提出しなければならない。
(8) The plans for a building require confirmation by a building official under Article 6, paragraph (1), under the case of the preceding paragraph, the building owner must submit the conformity review notice in the preceding paragraph or a copy thereof to the relevant building official not later than three days before the final day of the period in the paragraph (4) of that Article (if the period has been extended pursuant to the provision of paragraph (6) of that Article, the extended period).
９　第一項の規定による構造計算適合性判定の申請書及び第四項から第六項までの通知書の様式は、国土交通省令で定める。
(9) The format for applications for structural calculation conformity reviews under paragraph (1) and written notices under provisions of paragraphs (4) through (6) will be determined by the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism.
（建築物の建築に関する確認の特例）
(Special Rules regarding Confirmation of Construction of Buildings)
第六条の四　第一号若しくは第二号に掲げる建築物の建築、大規模の修繕若しくは大規模の模様替又は第三号に掲げる建築物の建築に対する第六条及び第六条の二の規定の適用については、第六条第一項中「政令で定めるものをいう。以下同じ」とあるのは、「政令で定めるものをいい、建築基準法令の規定のうち政令で定める規定を除く。以下この条及び次条において同じ」とする。
Article 6-4  (1) In applying the provisions referred to in Article 6 and 6-2 to the construction, major repair, or major remodeling of buildings set forth in item (i) or (ii), or to the construction of buildings set forth in item (iii), "as specified by Cabinet Order; the same applies hereinafter" in Article 6, paragraph (1) shall read "as specified by Cabinet Order but excluding the provisions specified by Cabinet Order among the provisions referred to in building standard laws and regulations; the same in this and the next Article.":
一　第六十八条の十第一項の認定を受けた型式（次号において「認定型式」という。）に適合する建築材料を用いる建築物
(i) buildings using building materials for which type-approval has been obtained under Article 68-10, paragraph (1) (referred to as "approved type" in the following item);
二　認定型式に適合する建築物の部分を有する建築物
(ii) buildings with parts of buildings that conform to the approved type;
三　第六条第一項第四号に掲げる建築物で建築士の設計に係るもの
(iii) buildings set forth in Article 6, paragraph (1), item (iv), which are designed by Kenchikushi.
２　前項の規定により読み替えて適用される第六条第一項に規定する政令のうち建築基準法令の規定を定めるものにおいては、建築士の技術水準、建築物の敷地、構造及び用途その他の事情を勘案して、建築士及び建築物の区分に応じ、建築主事の審査を要しないこととしても建築物の安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認められる規定を定めるものとする。
(2) Cabinet Order which specifies the provisions of building standard laws and regulations under Article 6, paragraph (1) as applied by replacing phrases therein pursuant to the preceding paragraph, shall specify cases, according to the classification of Kenchikushi and buildings, where no objections are anticipated from the viewpoint of safety, fire prevention and sanitation of a building even if it is decided, based on the consideration of the technical level of Kenchikushi, site, structure and use of buildings and other conditions, that no review by a building official is required.
（建築物に関する完了検査）
(Final Inspection of Buildings)
第七条　建築主は、第六条第一項の規定による工事を完了したときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、建築主事の検査を申請しなければならない。
Article 7  (1) When construction work under Article 6, paragraph (1) has been completed, the building owner must apply for an inspection by the building official as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
２　前項の規定による申請は、第六条第一項の規定による工事が完了した日から四日以内に建築主事に到達するように、しなければならない。ただし、申請をしなかつたことについて国土交通省令で定めるやむを得ない理由があるときは、この限りでない。
(2) The application under the preceding paragraph must be submitted so that it reaches the building official within four days from the completion date of the construction work under Article 6, paragraph (1). Provided, however, that this shall not apply when there is an unavoidable reason for the failure to submit the application specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
３　前項ただし書の場合における検査の申請は、その理由がやんだ日から四日以内に建築主事に到達するように、しなければならない。
(3) The application for an inspection specified by the proviso of the preceding paragraph must be submitted so that it reaches the building official within four days from the day that the reason preventing its submission no longer exists.
４　建築主事が第一項の規定による申請を受理した場合においては、建築主事又はその委任を受けた当該市町村若しくは都道府県の職員（以下この章において「建築主事等」という。）は、その申請を受理した日から七日以内に、当該工事に係る建築物及びその敷地が建築基準関係規定に適合しているかどうかを検査しなければならない。
(4) If the building official has received an application under paragraph (1), the building official or an official of the relevant city, town, village, or prefecture as entrusted by the building officer (hereinafter in this Chapter, "building official, etc.") must inspect the building and its site concerning the relevant construction work whether they conform to the provisions related to building regulation, within seven days from the receipt of the application.
５　建築主事等は、前項の規定による検査をした場合において、当該建築物及びその敷地が建築基準関係規定に適合していることを認めたときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、当該建築物の建築主に対して検査済証を交付しなければならない。
(5) The building official, etc. must give the building owner of the building concerned a certificate of final inspection as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, when the building official has conducted an inspection under the preceding paragraph and confirmed that the relevant building and its site conform to the provisions related to building regulation.
（国土交通大臣等の指定を受けた者による完了検査）
(Final Inspection by a Person Designated by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism)
第七条の二　第七十七条の十八から第七十七条の二十一までの規定の定めるところにより国土交通大臣又は都道府県知事が指定した者が、第六条第一項の規定による工事の完了の日から四日が経過する日までに、当該工事に係る建築物及びその敷地が建築基準関係規定に適合しているかどうかの検査を引き受けた場合において、当該検査の引受けに係る工事が完了したときについては、前条第一項から第三項までの規定は、適用しない。
Article 7-2  (1) The provisions of paragraphs (1) through (3) of the preceding Article shall not apply when a person designated by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or a prefectural governor under Articles 77-18 through 77-21 has accepted to perform an inspection of construction work under Article 6, paragraph (1) within four days from the completion date of the relevant construction work to confirm whether the building and its site conform to the provisions related to building regulation, and when the construction work is completed.
２　前項の規定による指定は、二以上の都道府県の区域において同項の検査の業務を行おうとする者を指定する場合にあつては国土交通大臣が、一の都道府県の区域において同項の検査の業務を行おうとする者を指定する場合にあつては都道府県知事がするものとする。
(2) The designation under the preceding paragraph shall be performed by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism in the case of designating a person who intends to perform the inspection work in that paragraph within an area encompassing two or more prefectures, or by a prefectural governor in the case of designating a person who intends to perform the inspection work in that paragraph within a single prefecture.
３　第一項の規定による指定を受けた者は、同項の規定による検査の引受けを行つたときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、その旨を証する書面を建築主に交付するとともに、その旨を建築主事に通知しなければならない。
(3) When a person designated under paragraph (1) has accepted to perform an inspection under that paragraph, it must issue written confirmation of that acceptance to the building owner and must notify the building official to that effect as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
４　第一項の規定による指定を受けた者は、同項の規定による検査の引受けを行つたときは、当該検査の引受けを行つた第六条第一項の規定による工事が完了した日又は当該検査の引受けを行つた日のいずれか遅い日から七日以内に、第一項の検査をしなければならない。
(4) When a person designated under paragraph (1) has accepted to perform an inspection under that paragraph, it must perform the inspection within seven days of the later of two dates: either the day that the construction work under Article 6, paragraph (1) has been completed, or the day that the person accepted the relevant inspection.
５　第一項の規定による指定を受けた者は、同項の検査をした建築物及びその敷地が建築基準関係規定に適合していることを認めたときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、当該建築物の建築主に対して検査済証を交付しなければならない。この場合において、当該検査済証は、前条第五項の検査済証とみなす。
(5) When a person designated under paragraph (1) confirms that the building and its site inspected under that paragraph conform to the provisions related to building regulation, it must issue a certificate of final inspection to the building owner of the relevant building as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order. In this case, the relevant certificate of final inspection shall be considered equivalent to the certificate of final inspection specified in paragraph (5) of the preceding Article.
６　第一項の規定による指定を受けた者は、同項の検査をしたときは、国土交通省令で定める期間内に、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、完了検査報告書を作成し、同項の検査をした建築物及びその敷地に関する国土交通省令で定める書類を添えて、これを特定行政庁に提出しなければならない。
(6) When a person designated under paragraph (1) has performed the inspection in that paragraph, the relevant person shall, within a period specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, prepare a final inspection report, attach documents specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order concerning the building and its site that was inspected under that paragraph, and must submit this to the Designated Administrative Agency as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
７　特定行政庁は、前項の規定による完了検査報告書の提出を受けた場合において、第一項の検査をした建築物及びその敷地が建築基準関係規定に適合しないと認めるときは、遅滞なく、第九条第一項又は第七項の規定による命令その他必要な措置を講ずるものとする。
(7) When the Designated Administrative Agency has received the submission of the final inspection report under the preceding paragraph, if it finds that the building and its site inspected under paragraph (1) does not conform to the provisions related to building regulation, it immediately issues orders and takes other necessary measures in accordance with the provisions of Article 9, paragraph (1) or (7).
（建築物に関する中間検査）
(Interim Inspection of Buildings)
第七条の三　建築主は、第六条第一項の規定による工事が次の各号のいずれかに該当する工程（以下「特定工程」という。）を含む場合において、当該特定工程に係る工事を終えたときは、その都度、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、建築主事の検査を申請しなければならない。
Article 7-3  (1) If construction work under Article 6, paragraph (1) includes one of the processes coming under any of the following items (hereinafter referred to as, "designated construction processes") and this work including the relevant designated construction process has been completed, a building owner must request, on all that occasions, an inspection by the building official as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
一　階数が三以上である共同住宅の床及びはりに鉄筋を配置する工事の工程のうち政令で定める工程
(i) a process specified by Cabinet Order among processes of construction work for installing reinforcing bars in the floors and beams of apartment buildings with three or more stories;
二　前号に掲げるもののほか、特定行政庁が、その地方の建築物の建築の動向又は工事に関する状況その他の事情を勘案して、区域、期間又は建築物の構造、用途若しくは規模を限つて指定する工程
(ii) in addition to those set forth in the preceding paragraph, processes that the Designated Administrative Agency stipulates, limiting area, period, or the structure, use, or scale of the building considering trends in the construction of buildings, state of construction work and other circumstances in the region.
２　前項の規定による申請は、特定工程に係る工事を終えた日から四日以内に建築主事に到達するように、しなければならない。ただし、申請をしなかったことについて国土交通省令で定めるやむを得ない理由があるときは、この限りでない。
(2) The application under the preceding paragraph must be submitted to the building official within four days from the day the work involving the designated construction process has been completed. Provided, however, that this shall not apply when there is an unavoidable reason for the failure to submit the application as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
３　前項ただし書の場合における検査の申請は、その理由がやんだ日から四日以内に建築主事に到達するように、しなければならない。
(3) The application for an inspection specified by the proviso of the preceding paragraph must be submitted so that it reaches the building official within four days from the day that the reason preventing its submission no longer exists.
４　建築主事が第一項の規定による申請を受理した場合においては、建築主事等は、その申請を受理した日から四日以内に、当該申請に係る工事中の建築物等（建築、大規模の修繕又は大規模の模様替の工事中の建築物及びその敷地をいう。以下この章において同じ。）について、検査前に施工された工事に係る建築物の部分及びその敷地が建築基準関係規定に適合するかどうかを検査しなければならない。
(4) When the building official has received an application under paragraph (1), the building official, etc. shall inspect parts of buildings and their sites where work was executed prior to the inspection to confirm whether it conforms to the provisions related to building regulation, within four days after receiving the application, concerning the buildings, etc. under construction work (meaning the building and its site during construction, major repair, or major remodeling; hereinafter the same in this Chapter).
５　建築主事等は、前項の規定による検査をした場合において、工事中の建築物等が建築基準関係規定に適合することを認めたときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、当該建築主に対して当該特定工程に係る中間検査合格証を交付しなければならない。
(5) When the building official, etc. has performed an inspection under the preceding paragraph and has confirmed the fact that the buildings, etc. under construction work conform to the provisions related to building regulation, the building official must issue a certificate of interim inspection concerning the relevant designated construction process to the relevant building owner as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
６　第一項第一号の政令で定める特定工程ごとに政令で定める当該特定工程後の工程及び特定行政庁が同項第二号の指定と併せて指定する特定工程後の工程（第十八条第二十二項において「特定工程後の工程」と総称する。）に係る工事は、前項の規定による当該特定工程に係る中間検査合格証の交付を受けた後でなければ、これを施工してはならない。
(6) Construction work which follows processes executed after relevant designated construction process specified by Cabinet Order for each designated construction process specified by Cabinet Order under paragraph (1), item (i), and designated construction processes that the Designated Administrative Agency stipulates along with the provisions of item (ii) of that paragraph (referred to collectively as "processes executed after a designated construction process" in Article 18, paragraph (22)") must not be executed until after the certificate of interim inspection concerning the relevant designated construction process under the preceding paragraph has been issued.
７　建築主事等又は前条第一項の規定による指定を受けた者は、第四項の規定による検査において建築基準関係規定に適合することを認められた工事中の建築物等について、第七条第四項、前条第一項、第四項又は次条第一項の規定による検査をするときは、第四項の規定による検査において建築基準関係規定に適合することを認められた建築物の部分及びその敷地については、これらの規定による検査をすることを要しない。
(7) When a building, etc. under construction work of which conformity with the provisions related to building regulation has been confirmed by an inspection under paragraph (4); inspections under Article 7, paragraph (4), paragraphs (1) and (4) of the preceding Article; or paragraph (1) of the next Article, by a building official, etc. or a person designated under paragraph (1) of the preceding Article for the parts of buildings and site subject to the relevant interim inspection shall not be required.
８　第一項第二号の規定による指定に関して公示その他の必要な事項は、国土交通省令で定める。
(8) Public notice and other necessary items concerning designations under paragraph (1), item (ii) shall be specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（国土交通大臣等の指定を受けた者による中間検査）
(Interim Inspection by a Person Designated by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism)
第七条の四　第六条第一項の規定による工事が特定工程を含む場合において、第七条の二第一項の規定による指定を受けた者が当該特定工程に係る工事を終えた後の工事中の建築物等について、検査前に施工された工事に係る建築物の部分及びその敷地が建築基準関係規定に適合するかどうかの検査を当該工事を終えた日から四日が経過する日までに引き受けたときについては、前条第一項から第三項までの規定は、適用しない。
Article 7-4  (1) The provisions of paragraphs (1) through (3) of the preceding Article shall not apply if a person designated under Article 7-2, paragraph (1) has accepted to perform an inspection of part of a building or its site related work prior to the inspection concerning the building, etc. under construction work under Article 6, paragraph (1) and has completed the designated construction process, as to whether the building, etc. conforms to the provisions related to building regulation within four days after the completion date of the relevant construction work.
２　第七条の二第一項の規定による指定を受けた者は、前項の規定による検査の引受けを行つたときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、その旨を証する書面を建築主に交付するとともに、その旨を建築主事に通知しなければならない。
(2) When a person designated under Article 7-2, paragraph (1) has accepted to perform the inspection under the preceding paragraph, it must issue written confirmation of that acceptance to the building owner and shall notify the building official to that effect as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
３　第七条の二第一項の規定による指定を受けた者は、第一項の検査をした場合において、特定工程に係る工事中の建築物等が建築基準関係規定に適合することを認めたときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、当該建築主に対して当該特定工程に係る中間検査合格証を交付しなければならない。
(3) When a person designated under Article 7-2, paragraph (1) has performed the inspection provided for in paragraph (1) and has confirmed the fact that the building, etc. under construction work of a designated process conforms to the provisions related to building regulation, the relevant person must issue a certificate of interim inspection concerning the relevant designated construction process to the relevant building owner, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
４　前項の規定により交付された特定工程に係る中間検査合格証は、それぞれ、当該特定工程に係る前条第五項の中間検査合格証とみなす。
(4) A certificate of interim inspection concerning a designated construction process issued pursuant to the preceding paragraph shall, on all that occasions, be considered equivalent to the certificate of interim inspection concerning the relevant designated construction process specified in paragraph (5) of the preceding Article.
５　前条第七項の規定の適用については、第三項の規定により特定工程に係る中間検査合格証が交付された第一項の検査は、それぞれ、同条第五項の規定により当該特定工程に係る中間検査合格証が交付された同条第四項の規定による検査とみなす。
(5) In applying the provisions referred to in paragraph (7) of the preceding Article, an inspection provided for in paragraph (1) for which a certificate of interim inspection concerning a designated construction process was issued pursuant to paragraph (3) shall, on all that occasions, be considered equivalent to an inspection under paragraph (4) of that Article for which the certificate of interim inspection concerning the relevant designated construction process was issued pursuant to paragraph (5) of that Article.
６　第七条の二第一項の規定による指定を受けた者は、第一項の検査をしたときは、国土交通省令で定める期間内に、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、中間検査報告書を作成し、同項の検査をした工事中の建築物等に関する国土交通省令で定める書類を添えて、これを特定行政庁に提出しなければならない。
(6) When a person designated under Article 7-2, paragraph (1) has performed the inspection under paragraph (1), the relevant person shall prepare an interim inspection report, and accompanied by documents specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order concerning the building etc. under construction that was inspected under that paragraph, submit the report to the Designated Administrative Agency as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, within a period specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
７　特定行政庁は、前項の規定による中間検査報告書の提出を受けた場合において、第一項の検査をした工事中の建築物等が建築基準関係規定に適合しないと認めるときは、遅滞なく、第九条第一項又は第十項の規定による命令その他必要な措置を講ずるものとする。
(7) When the Designated Administrative Agency has received a submission of an interim inspection report, it finds that the building, etc. under construction work that was inspected under paragraph (1) does not conform to the provisions related to building regulation under the preceding paragraph, it immediately issues orders and takes other necessary measures under Article 9, paragraph (1) or (10).
（建築物に関する検査の特例）
(Special Rules regarding Inspection of Buildings)
第七条の五　第六条の四第一項第一号若しくは第二号に掲げる建築物の建築、大規模の修繕若しくは大規模の模様替又は同項第三号に掲げる建築物の建築の工事（同号に掲げる建築物の建築の工事にあつては、国土交通省令で定めるところにより建築士である工事監理者によつて設計図書のとおりに実施されたことが確認されたものに限る。）に対する第七条から前条までの規定の適用については、第七条第四項及び第五項中「建築基準関係規定」とあるのは「前条第一項の規定により読み替えて適用される第六条第一項に規定する建築基準関係規定」と、第七条の二第一項、第五項及び第七項、第七条の三第四項、第五項及び第七項並びに前条第一項、第三項及び第七項中「建築基準関係規定」とあるのは「第六条の四第一項の規定により読み替えて適用される第六条第一項に規定する建築基準関係規定」とする。
Article 7-5  In applying the provisions referred to in Article 7 through the preceding Article to the construction work, major repair, or major remodeling for a building set forth in item (i) or (ii) of Article 6-4, paragraph (1) or the construction work of a building set forth in item (iii) of that paragraph (in the case of construction work of a building set forth in that item, limited to that confirmed as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, to have been executed by Kenchikushi as the person who conducts construction administration in accordance with the drawings/specifications), the phrase, "provisions related to building regulation" appearing in Article 7, paragraphs (4) and (5) shall read, "provisions related to building regulation provided for in Article 6, paragraph (1) as applied by replacing phrases therein pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (1) of the preceding Article." Likewise, the phrase "provisions related to building regulation" in Article 7-2, paragraphs (1), (5), and (7), Article 7-3, paragraphs (4), (5), and (7), and paragraphs (1), (3), and (7) of the preceding Article shall read, "provisions related to building regulation pursuant to the provisions of Article 6, paragraph (1) as applied by replacing phrases therein in accordance with the provisions of Article 6-4, paragraph (1)."
（検査済証の交付を受けるまでの建築物の使用制限）
(Restrictions on Use of Buildings up to Obtaining the Certificate of Final Inspection)
第七条の六　第六条第一項第一号から第三号までの建築物を新築する場合又はこれらの建築物（共同住宅以外の住宅及び居室を有しない建築物を除く。）の増築、改築、移転、大規模の修繕若しくは大規模の模様替の工事で、廊下、階段、出入口その他の避難施設、消火栓、スプリンクラーその他の消火設備、排煙設備、非常用の照明装置、非常用の昇降機若しくは防火区画で政令で定めるものに関する工事（政令で定める軽易な工事を除く。以下この項、第十八条第二十四項及び第九十条の三において「避難施設等に関する工事」という。）を含むものをする場合においては、当該建築物の建築主は、第七条第五項の検査済証の交付を受けた後でなければ、当該新築に係る建築物又は当該避難施設等に関する工事に係る建築物若しくは建築物の部分を使用し、又は使用させてはならない。ただし、次の各号のいずれかに該当する場合には、検査済証の交付を受ける前においても、仮に、当該建築物又は建築物の部分を使用し、又は使用させることができる。
Article 7-6  (1) If buildings as mentioned in Article 6, paragraph (1) items (i) through (iii) are newly constructed, or where construction work for addition to, rebuilding, relocation, major repair or major remodeling of those buildings (excluding any houses other than apartment houses and any buildings which have no habitable rooms) includes construction work on corridors, stairways, doorways or other evacuation facilities, fire hydrants, sprinklers or other fire extinguishing equipment, smoke exhaust equipment, emergency lighting system, elevatory system for emergency use or fire compartments which are specified by Cabinet Order (excluding minor construction work as specified by Cabinet Order; referred to in this paragraph, Article 18, paragraph (24) and Article 90-3 as "construction work on evacuation facilities, etc."), the building owner concerned shall neither use nor let anyone use the building to be newly constructed, or the building or its parts subject to construction work on evacuation facilities, etc. until the building owner obtains a certificate of final inspection under Article 7, paragraph (5). Provided, however, that in cases of any of the following items, the building owner may use or let someone use the relevant building or its parts temporarily even before obtaining the certificate of final inspection:
一　特定行政庁が、安全上、防火上及び避難上支障がないと認めたとき。
(i) where the Designated Administrative Agency determines that there is no objection from the viewpoint of safety, fire prevention, or evacuation;
二　建築主事又は第七条の二第一項の規定による指定を受けた者が、安全上、防火上及び避難上支障がないものとして国土交通大臣が定める基準に適合していることを認めたとき。
(ii) where a building official or a person designated under Article 7-2, paragraph (1) determines that conformity to the standards defined by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism has been achieved on the basis that there is no objection from the viewpoint of safety, fire prevention, or evacuation;
三　第七条第一項の規定による申請が受理された日（第七条の二第一項の規定による指定を受けた者が同項の規定による検査の引受けを行つた場合にあつては、当該検査の引受けに係る工事が完了した日又は当該検査の引受けを行つた日のいずれか遅い日）から七日を経過したとき。
(iii) where seven days have elapsed from the day (when a person designated under Article 7-2, paragraph (1) has accepted to perform the inspection under that paragraph, the construction work under has been completed, or the day that the person accepted the relevant inspection, whichever is later) on which the application under Article 7, paragraph (1) was received.
２　前項第一号及び第二号の規定による認定の申請の手続に関し必要な事項は、国土交通省令で定める。
(2) Necessary items concerning the procedures of applying for permission under items (i) and (ii) of the preceding paragraph shall be specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
３　第七条の二第一項の規定による指定を受けた者は、第一項第二号の規定による認定をしたときは、国土交通省令で定める期間内に、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、仮使用認定報告書を作成し、同号の規定による認定をした建築物に関する国土交通省令で定める書類を添えて、これを特定行政庁に提出しなければならない。
(3) If a person designated under Article 7, paragraph (2), item (i) grants approval under paragraph (1), item (ii), a temporary use approval report must be created as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order within the period specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order and submitted to the Designated Administrative Agency, together with documentation concerning the approved building under that item, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
４　特定行政庁は、前項の規定による仮使用認定報告書の提出を受けた場合において、第一項第二号の規定による認定を受けた建築物が同号の国土交通大臣が定める基準に適合しないと認めるときは、当該建築物の建築主及び当該認定を行つた第七条の二第一項の規定による指定を受けた者にその旨を通知しなければならない。この場合において、当該認定は、その効力を失う。
(4) When the Designated Administrative Agency has received a submission of temporary use approval report under the preceding paragraph, it finds that the building for which approval has been given under paragraph (1), item (ii) does not to conform to the standards specified by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, it must notify this information to the owner of the relevant building and to the person designated under Article 7-2, paragraph (1) who carried out the relevant approval. In this case, the relevant approval shall cease to be effective.
（維持保全）
(Maintenance)
第八条　建築物の所有者、管理者又は占有者は、その建築物の敷地、構造及び建築設備を常時適法な状態に維持するように努めなければならない。
Article 8  (1) The owner, custodian or occupant of a building must endeavor to maintain the site, construction and building equipment of the building in a state complying with legal requirements.
２　次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物の所有者又は管理者は、その建築物の敷地、構造及び建築設備を常時適法な状態に維持するため、必要に応じ、その建築物の維持保全に関する準則又は計画を作成し、その他適切な措置を講じなければならない。ただし、国、都道府県又は建築主事を置く市町村が所有し、又は管理する建築物については、この限りでない。
(2) The owner or custodian of a building coming under any of the following items must prepare standards or plans for the maintenance of the building and take other appropriate measures as the need arises, in order to maintain the site, construction and building equipment of the building in a state complying with legal requirements. Provided, however, this shall not apply to a building owned or managed by the State, a prefecture, or a municipality that has building officials.
一　特殊建築物で安全上、防火上又は衛生上特に重要であるものとして政令で定めるもの
(i) special buildings specified by Cabinet Order as being especially important from the viewpoint of safety, fire protection and sanitation;
二　前号の特殊建築物以外の特殊建築物その他政令で定める建築物で、特定行政庁が指定するもの
(ii) special buildings other than the special buildings mentioned in the preceding item or other buildings specified by Cabinet Order that are designated by the Designated Administrative Agency.
３　国土交通大臣は、前項各号のいずれかに該当する建築物の所有者又は管理者による同項の準則又は計画の適確な作成に資するため、必要な指針を定めることができる。
(3) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may specify necessary guidelines in order to contribute to the proper preparation provision of standards or plans mentioned in the preceding paragraph by the owner or custodian of a building that comes under any of the items in that paragraph.
（違反建築物に対する措置）
(Measures concerning Building in Violation)
第九条　特定行政庁は、建築基準法令の規定又はこの法律の規定に基づく許可に付した条件に違反した建築物又は建築物の敷地については、当該建築物の建築主、当該建築物に関する工事の請負人（請負工事の下請人を含む。）若しくは現場管理者又は当該建築物若しくは建築物の敷地の所有者、管理者若しくは占有者に対して、当該工事の施工の停止を命じ、又は、相当の猶予期限を付けて、当該建築物の除却、移転、改築、増築、修繕、模様替、使用禁止、使用制限その他これらの規定又は条件に対する違反を是正するために必要な措置をとることを命ずることができる。
Article 9  (1) With respect to buildings or building sites in violation of the provisions of building standard laws and regulations or of requirements attached to permission based on the provisions of this Act, the Designated Administrative Agency may issue orders for the suspension of the construction work concerned or, providing a reasonable grace period, for the demolition, relocation, rebuilding, addition, repair, remodeling, prohibition or restriction of use of the building concerned or the implementation of other measures to correct violations against those provisions or requirements, to the building owner of the relevant building, or to the contractor (including subcontractors of contracted work) or field manager of the construction work on the relevant building, or to the owner, custodian or occupant of the relevant building or its site.
２　特定行政庁は、前項の措置を命じようとする場合においては、あらかじめ、その措置を命じようとする者に対して、その命じようとする措置及びその事由並びに意見書の提出先及び提出期限を記載した通知書を交付して、その措置を命じようとする者又はその代理人に意見書及び自己に有利な証拠を提出する機会を与えなければならない。
(2) When the Designated Administrative Agency intends to issue an order for the measures mentioned in the preceding paragraph, it must deliver in advance a written notice setting forth the measures to be taken, the reason therefor and the office to which written opinions are to be submitted, and the deadline for submission of written opinions to the person to be ordered to take those measures. It must provide the person to be ordered to take those measures or a representative of the person concerned with the opportunity to submit a written opinion and evidence advantageous to the person concerned.
３　前項の通知書の交付を受けた者は、その交付を受けた日から三日以内に、特定行政庁に対して、意見書の提出に代えて公開による意見の聴取を行うことを請求することができる。
(3) A person who has received a written notice under the preceding paragraph may request the Designated Administrative Agency to hold a public hearing within three days from the day of receipt thereof instead of a submission of written opinions.
４　特定行政庁は、前項の規定による意見の聴取の請求があつた場合においては、第一項の措置を命じようとする者又はその代理人の出頭を求めて、公開による意見の聴取を行わなければならない。
(4) When a hearing of opinions has been requested under the preceding paragraph, the Designated Administrative Agency must request the appearance of the person who is seeking to order the measures in paragraph (1) or of which agent, and hold a public hearing of opinions.
５　特定行政庁は、前項の規定による意見の聴取を行う場合においては、第一項の規定によつて命じようとする措置並びに意見の聴取の期日及び場所を、期日の二日前までに、前項に規定する者に通知するとともに、これを公告しなければならない。
(5) When the Designated Administrative Agency conducts the hearing of opinions under the preceding paragraph, it must notify the person specified in the preceding paragraph of the measures that it is seeking to order under paragraph (1), and the date and place of the hearing not later than two days before that date, and it must give public notice thereof.
６　第四項に規定する者は、意見の聴取に際して、証人を出席させ、かつ、自己に有利な証拠を提出することができる。
(6) The person specified in paragraph (4) may present witnesses and submit evidence in one's favor at the hearing.
７　特定行政庁は、緊急の必要がある場合においては、前五項の規定にかかわらず、これらに定める手続によらないで、仮に、使用禁止又は使用制限の命令をすることができる。
(7) The Designated Administrative Agency may issue provisional orders for the prohibition or restriction of use of a building without following the procedure specified in the preceding five paragraphs, notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding five paragraphs in case of urgent necessity.
８　前項の命令を受けた者は、その命令を受けた日から三日以内に、特定行政庁に対して公開による意見の聴取を行うことを請求することができる。この場合においては、第四項から第六項までの規定を準用する。ただし、意見の聴取は、その請求があつた日から五日以内に行わなければならない。
(8) A person who has received an order under the preceding paragraph may request the Designated Administrative Agency to hold a public hearing within three days from the day of receipt thereof. In this case, the provisions of paragraphs (4) through (6) shall apply mutatis mutandis. Provided, however, that the hearing must be held within five days from the day of that request.
９　特定行政庁は、前項の意見の聴取の結果に基づいて、第七項の規定によつて仮にした命令が不当でないと認めた場合においては、第一項の命令をすることができる。意見の聴取の結果、第七項の規定によつて仮にした命令が不当であると認めた場合においては、直ちに、その命令を取り消さなければならない。
(9) If the Designated Administrative Agency concludes as a result of a hearing held under the preceding paragraph that a provisional order issued under paragraph (7) is reasonable, it may render an order under paragraph (1). If it concludes as a result of the hearing that a provisional order issued under paragraph (7) is unreasonable, it must revoke the order immediately.
１０　特定行政庁は、建築基準法令の規定又はこの法律の規定に基づく許可に付した条件に違反することが明らかな建築、修繕又は模様替の工事中の建築物については、緊急の必要があつて第二項から第六項までに定める手続によることができない場合に限り、これらの手続によらないで、当該建築物の建築主又は当該工事の請負人（請負工事の下請人を含む。）若しくは現場管理者に対して、当該工事の施工の停止を命ずることができる。この場合において、これらの者が当該工事の現場にいないときは、当該工事に従事する者に対して、当該工事に係る作業の停止を命ずることができる。
(10) With respect to buildings under construction, repair, or remodeling apparently in violation of the provisions of building standard laws and regulations or of requirements attached to permission based on the provisions of this Act, the Designated Administrative Agency may issue orders for the suspension of the construction work concerned without following the procedure, to the building owner of the building concerned, or to the contractor (including subcontractors of contracted work) or field manager of the relevant construction work only when that procedure as specified in paragraphs (2) through (6) can not be taken because of urgent necessity,. In this case, when these persons not in the field of the relevant construction work, it may order persons actually engaged in the relevant construction work to suspend it.
１１　第一項の規定により必要な措置を命じようとする場合において、過失がなくてその措置を命ぜられるべき者を確知することができず、かつ、その違反を放置することが著しく公益に反すると認められるときは、特定行政庁は、その者の負担において、その措置を自ら行い、又はその命じた者若しくは委任した者に行わせることができる。この場合においては、相当の期限を定めて、その措置を行うべき旨及びその期限までにその措置を行わないときは、特定行政庁又はその命じた者若しくは委任した者がその措置を行うべき旨をあらかじめ公告しなければならない。
(11) When the Designated Administrative Agency intends to issue an order for the necessary measures pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (1), and it can not identify, despite its every effort, the person to whom the order is to be issued and concludes that leaving the violation as it is will be extremely contrary to the public interest, it may take the measures by itself at the expense of such person, or may order or entrust a person to take the measures. In this case, it must give public notice in advance to the effect that the measures shall be taken in a specified reasonable period, and that if the measures are not taken within the time limit, the Designated Administrative Agency or the person ordered or entrusted by it shall take the measures.
１２　特定行政庁は、第一項の規定により必要な措置を命じた場合において、その措置を命ぜられた者がその措置を履行しないとき、履行しても十分でないとき、又は履行しても同項の期限までに完了する見込みがないときは、行政代執行法（昭和二十三年法律第四十三号）の定めるところに従い、みずから義務者のなすべき行為をし、又は第三者をしてこれをさせることができる。
(12) When the Designated Administrative Agency has issued an order for the necessary measures pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (1), and the person ordered to take the measures does not perform the measures, the performance is insufficient, or the performance cannot be expected to be completed within a period as mentioned in that paragraph, it may proceed to execute, by itself, the measures which should have been taken by the person under obligation or to cause a third person to take those measures as specified by the Act on Substitute Execution by Administration (Act No. 43 of 1948).
１３　特定行政庁は、第一項又は第十項の規定による命令をした場合（建築監視員が第十項の規定による命令をした場合を含む。）においては、標識の設置その他国土交通省令で定める方法により、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(13) When the Designated Administrative Agency has issued an order under paragraph (1) or (10) (including cases where a building surveillant has issued an order under paragraph (10)), it must publicly notify to that effect by way of a sign board or other method as established by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
１４　前項の標識は、第一項又は第十項の規定による命令に係る建築物又は建築物の敷地内に設置することができる。この場合においては、第一項又は第十項の規定による命令に係る建築物又は建築物の敷地の所有者、管理者又は占有者は、当該標識の設置を拒み、又は妨げてはならない。
(14) A sign board in the preceding paragraph may be established in the building or at the building site subject to an order under paragraph (1) or (10). In this case, the owner, custodian or occupant of the building or building site subject to that order under paragraph (1) or (10) shall neither refuse nor obstruct the establishment of the relevant sign board.
１５　第一項、第七項又は第十項の規定による命令については、行政手続法（平成五年法律第八十八号）第三章（第十二条及び第十四条を除く。）の規定は、適用しない。
(15) The provisions of Chapter III (excluding Article 12 and Article 14) of the Administrative Procedures Act (Act No. 88 of 1993) shall not apply to orders issued under paragraph (1), (7), or (10).
（建築監視員）
(Building Surveillants)
第九条の二　特定行政庁は、政令で定めるところにより、当該市町村又は都道府県の職員のうちから建築監視員を命じ、前条第七項及び第十項に規定する特定行政庁の権限を行なわせることができる。
Article 9-2  The Designated Administrative Agency may appoint building surveillants from among the officials of the relevant city, town, village, or prefecture and have them exercise the authority of the Designated Administrative Agency as specified in paragraphs (7) and (10) of the preceding Article as specified by Cabinet Order.
（違反建築物の設計者等に対する措置）
(Measures Taken against the Designers of Buildings in Violation)
第九条の三　特定行政庁は、第九条第一項又は第十項の規定による命令をした場合（建築監視員が同条第十項の規定による命令をした場合を含む。）においては、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、当該命令に係る建築物の設計者、工事監理者若しくは工事の請負人（請負工事の下請人を含む。次項において同じ。）若しくは当該建築物について宅地建物取引業に係る取引をした宅地建物取引業者又は当該命令に係る浄化槽の製造業者の氏名又は名称及び住所その他国土交通省令で定める事項を、建築士法、建設業法（昭和二十四年法律第百号）、浄化槽法（昭和五十八年法律第四十三号）又は宅地建物取引業法（昭和二十七年法律第百七十六号）の定めるところによりこれらの者を監督する国土交通大臣又は都道府県知事に通知しなければならない。
Article 9-3  (1) When the Designated Administrative Agency has issued an order under Article 9, paragraph (1) or (10) (including cases where a building surveillant has issued an order under paragraph (10) of that Article), it must give notice of the name or appellation and address of the designer, the person who conducts construction administration or contractor (including subcontractors of contracted work; the same in the next paragraph) of the building subject to the relevant order or those of the building lot and building transaction agent that has conducted the transaction concerning the relevant building or manufacturer of wastewater purifier concerning the order concerned, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, and other items specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, to the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or the prefectural governor supervising these persons in accordance with the Act on Architects and Building Engineers, the Construction Business Act (Act No. 100 of 1949), the Purification Tank Act (Act No. 43 of 1983) or the Real Estate Brokerage Act (Act No. 176 of 1952).
２　国土交通大臣又は都道府県知事は、前項の規定による通知を受けた場合においては、遅滞なく、当該通知に係る者について、建築士法、建設業法、浄化槽法又は宅地建物取引業法による免許又は許可の取消し、業務の停止の処分その他必要な措置を講ずるものとし、その結果を同項の規定による通知をした特定行政庁に通知しなければならない。
(2) Having received a notice under the preceding paragraph, without delay, the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or prefectural governor must revoke any license or permission which has been issued under the Act on Architects and Building Engineers, the Construction Business Act, the Purification Tank Act or the Real Estate Brokerage Act, take actions to suspend services or other necessary measures with respect to the persons concerned in the relevant notice, and give notice of the results to the Designated Administrative Agency having made the relevant notice under that paragraph.
（保安上危険な建築物等の所有者等に対する指導及び助言）
(Guidance and advice for the owner of a building that is a threat to public safety)
第九条の四　特定行政庁は、建築物の敷地、構造又は建築設備（いずれも第三条第二項の規定により次章の規定又はこれに基づく命令若しくは条例の規定の適用を受けないものに限る。）について、損傷、腐食その他の劣化が生じ、そのまま放置すれば保安上危険となり、又は衛生上有害となるおそれがあると認める場合においては、当該建築物又はその敷地の所有者、管理者又は占有者に対して、修繕、防腐措置その他当該建築物又はその敷地の維持保全に関し必要な指導及び助言をすることができる。
Article 9-4  In a case where the Designated Administrative Agency concludes that the site, construction or building equipment of a building (limited to those that, pursuant to the provisions of Article 3, paragraph (2), are not subject to the provisions of next Chapter nor to the provisions referred to in orders or ordinances based thereon) has been damaged, is corroded or has suffered other deterioration, and that if this damage, etc. is not repaired, it will be a threat to public safety or will be harmful to sanitation, the Designated Administrative Agency may state necessary guidance and advise the owner, custodian or occupant of the relevant building, or its building site concerning the repair, corrosion prevention measures or other maintenance of the relevant building or its building site.
（著しく保安上危険な建築物等の所有者等に対する勧告及び命令）
(Warning and order to the owner of a building that is a threat to public safety)
第十条　特定行政庁は、第六条第一項第一号に掲げる建築物その他政令で定める建築物の敷地、構造又は建築設備（いずれも第三条第二項の規定により次章の規定又はこれに基づく命令若しくは条例の規定の適用を受けないものに限る。）について、損傷、腐食その他の劣化が進み、そのまま放置すれば著しく保安上危険となり、又は著しく衛生上有害となるおそれがあると認める場合においては、当該建築物又はその敷地の所有者、管理者又は占有者に対して、相当の猶予期限を付けて、当該建築物の除却、移転、改築、増築、修繕、模様替、使用中止、使用制限その他保安上又は衛生上必要な措置をとることを勧告することができる。
Article 10  (1) In a case where the Designated Administrative Agency concludes that the site, construction, or building equipment of a building set forth in Article 6, paragraph (1), item (i) or building specified by another Cabinet Order (limited to those that, pursuant to the provisions of Article 3, paragraph (2), are not subject to the provisions of next Chapter nor to the provisions referred to in orders or ordinances based thereon) has been damaged, corroded, or suffered other deterioration, and that if this damage etc. is not repaired, it will be seriously dangerous to public safety or will be seriously harmful to sanitation, the Designated Administrative Agency shall issue a warning to the owner, custodian, or occupant of the relevant building or its building lot, giving an appropriate grace period, for the demolition, relocation, rebuilding, addition, repair, remodeling, prohibition or restriction of use of the relevant building or other measures necessary to preserve public safety or to keep sanitation.
２　特定行政庁は、前項の勧告を受けた者が正当な理由がなくてその勧告に係る措置をとらなかつた場合において、特に必要があると認めるときは、その者に対し、相当の猶予期限を付けて、その勧告に係る措置をとることを命ずることができる。
(2) In cases where the person that has been issued a warning in the preceding paragraph has not taken the relevant measures without justifiable grounds, if the Designated Administrative Agency fides it to be particularly necessary, it may order the relevant person to take the measures in the warning, giving an appropriate grace period.
３　前項の規定による場合のほか、特定行政庁は、建築物の敷地、構造又は建築設備（いずれも第三条第二項の規定により次章の規定又はこれに基づく命令若しくは条例の規定の適用を受けないものに限る。）が著しく保安上危険であり、又は著しく衛生上有害であると認める場合においては、当該建築物又はその敷地の所有者、管理者又は占有者に対して、相当の猶予期限を付けて、当該建築物の除却、移転、改築、増築、修繕、模様替、使用禁止、使用制限その他保安上又は衛生上必要な措置をとることを命ずることができる。
(3) In cases other than cases under the preceding paragraph, where the Designated Administrative Agency concludes that the site, construction or building equipment of a building is seriously dangerous to public safety or harmful to sanitation (limited to those for which the relevant building is not subject to the provisions referred to in next Chapter or those of orders or ordinances based thereon pursuant to the provisions of Article 3, paragraph (2)), it may order the owner, custodian or occupant of the relevant building or its site for the demolition, relocation, rebuilding, addition, repair, remodeling, prohibition or restriction of use of the relevant building or other measures necessary to preserve public safety or to keep sanitation ,giving an appropriate grace period.
４　第九条第二項から第九項まで及び第十一項から第十五項までの規定は、前二項の場合に準用する。
(4) The provisions of Article 9, paragraphs (2) through (9) and paragraphs (11) through (15) shall apply mutatis mutandis in cases as specified in the preceding 2 paragraphs.
（第三章の規定に適合しない建築物に対する措置）
(Measures concerning Buildings Not in Conformity to Provisions of Chapter III)
第十一条　特定行政庁は、建築物の敷地、構造、建築設備又は用途（いずれも第三条第二項（第八十六条の九第一項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定により第三章の規定又はこれに基づく命令若しくは条例の規定の適用を受けないものに限る。）が公益上著しく支障があると認める場合においては、当該建築物の所在地の市町村の議会の同意を得た場合に限り、当該建築物の所有者、管理者又は占有者に対して、相当の猶予期限を付けて、当該建築物の除却、移転、修繕、模様替、使用禁止又は使用制限を命ずることができる。この場合においては、当該建築物の所在地の市町村は、当該命令に基づく措置によつて通常生ずべき損害を時価によつて補償しなければならない。
Article 11  (1) When the Designated Administrative Agency finds that the site, construction or building equipment, or use of a building (limited to those for which the relevant building is not subject to the provisions of Chapter III or those referred to in orders or ordinances based thereon pursuant to the provisions of Article 3, paragraph (2) (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 86-9, paragraph (1)), conspicuously spoils the public interests, it may, only after consent has been obtained from the assembly of the municipality where the relevant building is located, orders the owner, custodian or occupant of the relevant building, giving an appropriate grace period, for the demolition, relocation, repair, remodeling, prohibition or restriction of use of the relevant building. In this case, the municipality where the relevant building is located must compensate for the loss to be normally expected by the measures taken based on that order, at the current market price.
２　前項の規定によつて補償を受けることができる者は、その補償金額に不服がある場合においては、政令の定める手続によつて、その決定の通知を受けた日から一月以内に土地収用法（昭和二十六年法律第二百十九号）第九十四条第二項の規定による収用委員会の裁決を求めることができる。
(2) If a person entitled to compensation under the preceding paragraph objects to the determined amount of compensation, such person may ask, within one month from the day on which such person have received the notice of that amount, for a ruling by the Expropriation Committee under Article 94, paragraph (2) of the Expropriation of Land Act (Act No. 219 of 1951) in accordance with the procedure specified by Cabinet Order.
（報告、検査等）
(Reports, Inspections)
第十二条　第六条第一項第一号に掲げる建築物で安全上、防火上又は衛生上特に重要であるものとして政令で定めるもの（国、都道府県及び建築主事を置く市町村が所有し、又は管理する建築物（以下この項及び第三項において「国等の建築物」という。）を除く。）及び当該政令で定めるもの以外の特定建築物（同号に掲げる建築物その他政令で定める建築物をいう。以下この条において同じ。）で特定行政庁が指定するもの（国等の建築物を除く。）の所有者（所有者と管理者が異なる場合においては、管理者。第三項において同じ。）は、これらの建築物の敷地、構造及び建築設備について、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、定期に、一級建築士若しくは二級建築士又は建築物調査員資格者証の交付を受けている者（次項及び次条第三項において「建築物調査員」という。）にその状況の調査（これらの建築物の敷地及び構造についての損傷、腐食その他の劣化の状況の点検を含み、これらの建築物の建築設備及び防火戸その他の政令で定める防火設備（以下「建築設備等」という。）についての第三項の検査を除く。）をさせて、その結果を特定行政庁に報告しなければならない。
Article 12  (1) The owner (the custodian if the owner and the custodian are different persons; the same in paragraph (3)) of a building as mentioned in Article 6, paragraph (1) item (i) that has been specified by Cabinet Order as being particularly important for safety, fire prevention, or sanitation (excluding buildings owned or managed by the state, prefectures, or a municipality that has building officials, referred to in this paragraph and paragraph (3) as "buildings of the state, etc.") or a designated building other than one specified by the relevant Cabinet Order (defined as a building set forth in that item and other buildings as specified by Cabinet Order, the same in the remainder of this Article) must have the site, structure, and building equipment inspected periodically (including inspections of damage, corrosion, and other deterioration to the building site and structure, excluding inspections of building equipment, fire doors, and other fire prevention equipment in the building, as specified by Cabinet Order (hereinafter referred to as "building equipment, etc.") by a 1st-class Kenchikushi, a 2nd-class Kenchikushi, or a person certified as a qualified building inspector (referred to in the following paragraph and paragraph (3) of the next Article as "building inspectors") and report the inspection results to the Designated Administrative Agency, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
２　国、都道府県又は建築主事を置く市町村が所有し、又は管理する特定建築物の管理者である国、都道府県若しくは市町村の機関の長又はその委任を受けた者（以下この章において「国の機関の長等」という。）は、当該特定建築物の敷地及び構造について、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、定期に、一級建築士若しくは二級建築士又は建築物調査員に、損傷、腐食その他の劣化の状況の点検（当該特定建築物の防火戸その他の前項の政令で定める防火設備についての第四項の点検を除く。）をさせなければならない。ただし、当該特定建築物（第六条第一項第一号に掲げる建築物で安全上、防火上又は衛生上特に重要であるものとして前項の政令で定めるもの及び同項の規定により特定行政庁が指定するものを除く。）のうち特定行政庁が安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めて建築審査会の同意を得て指定したものについては、この限りでない。
(2) Head of a body of the State, a prefecture, or a municipality that is the custodian of a designated building (limited to buildings mentioned in Article 6, paragraph (1), item (i) and other buildings specified by Cabinet Order in the preceding paragraph) owned or managed by the State, a prefecture, or a municipality that has building officials, or a person delegated by the head (below in this Chapter referred to as, "head, etc. of the national government organs"), must have a 1st-class Kenchikushi, a 2nd-class Kenchikushi or a building inspector periodically check the state of damage, corrosion, and other deterioration of the site and construction of the relevant designated building (excluding inspections of building equipment, fire doors, and other fire prevention equipment in the building in paragraph (4)), as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order. Provided, however, that these requirements shall not apply to designated buildings (excluding buildings designated under the provisions of Cabinet Order as mentioned in the preceding paragraph as being particularly important in relation to safety, fire prevention, and sanitation, set forth in Article 6, paragraph (1), Item (i), and designated by a Designated Administrative Agency pursuant to the provisions of the provision of that paragraph) that have been designated by a Designated Administrative Agency, with the consent of the Building Review Council, as causing no hindrance in relation to safety, fire prevention, or sanitation.
３　特定建築設備等（昇降機及び特定建築物の昇降機以外の建築設備等をいう。以下この項及び次項において同じ。）で安全上、防火上又は衛生上特に重要であるものとして政令で定めるもの（国等の建築物に設けるものを除く。）及び当該政令で定めるもの以外の特定建築設備等で特定行政庁が指定するもの（国等の建築物に設けるものを除く。）の所有者は、これらの特定建築設備等について、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、定期に、一級建築士若しくは二級建築士又は建築設備等検査員資格者証の交付を受けている者（次項及び第十二条の三第二項において「建築設備等検査員」という。）に検査（これらの特定建築設備等についての損傷、腐食その他の劣化の状況の点検を含む。）をさせて、その結果を特定行政庁に報告しなければならない。
(3) The owners of designated building equipment, etc. (defined as elevatory systems and building equipment, etc., other than elevatory systems in designated buildings, the same in this paragraph and the next) specified by Cabinet Orders as being particularly important for safety, fire prevention, or sanitation, and designated building equipment, etc. (excluding items installed in government buildings, etc.) and other than those specified by the relevant Cabinet Order (excluding items installed in government buildings, etc.) which has been designated by a Designated Administrative Agency, must have the relevant equipment inspected periodically (including inspection of the building equipment, etc., for damage, corrosion and other deterioration) by a 1st-class Kenchikushi, a 2nd-class Kenchikushi or a person certified as a qualified inspector (referred to as "inspector of building equipment, etc." in the next paragraph and in Article 12-3, paragraph (2)) and report the results to the Designated Administrative Agency.
４　国の機関の長等は、国、都道府県又は建築主事を置く市町村が所有し、又は管理する建築物の特定建築設備等について、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、定期に、一級建築士若しくは二級建築士又は建築設備等検査員に、損傷、腐食その他の劣化の状況の点検をさせなければならない。ただし、当該特定建築設備等（前項の政令で定めるもの及び同項の規定により特定行政庁が指定するものを除く。）のうち特定行政庁が安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めて建築審査会の同意を得て指定したものについては、この限りでない。
(4) The head, etc. of the national government organs must have a 1st-class Kenchikushi, a 2nd-class Kenchikushi or an inspector of building equipment, etc. periodically inspect designated building equipment, etc. for damage corrosion, or other deterioration, of elevatory system in a building owned or managed by the State, a prefecture, or a municipality that has building officials and building equipment other than elevatory system in a building of the State, a prefecture or a municipality having building officials (limited to buildings mentioned in Article 6, paragraph (1), item (i) and other buildings specified by Cabinet Order in paragraph (1)), as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order. Provided, however, that these requirements shall not apply to designated building equipment, etc. (excluding items specified by Cabinet Order referred to in the preceding paragraph, and items designated by the Designated Administrative Agency pursuant to the provisions of that paragraph) that have been designated by a Designated Administrative Agency, with the consent of the Building Review Council, as causing no hindrance in relation to safety, fire prevention, or sanitation.
５　特定行政庁、建築主事又は建築監視員は、次に掲げる者に対して、建築物の敷地、構造、建築設備若しくは用途、建築材料若しくは建築設備その他の建築物の部分（以下「建築材料等」という。）の受取若しくは引渡しの状況、建築物に関する工事の計画若しくは施工の状況又は建築物の敷地、構造若しくは建築設備に関する調査（以下「建築物に関する調査」という。）の状況に関する報告を求めることができる。
(5) The Designated Administrative Agency, a building official or building surveillant may request the following parties a report on the site, construction, building equipment the use of a building, the receipt or delivery of materials, building equipment or other building parts (hereinafter referred to as "building materials, etc."), or on the scheme of construction work or progress of construction work on a building, or on the progress of surveys relating to the building site, structure, or building equipment (hereinafter referred to as "building-related surveys").
一　建築物若しくは建築物の敷地の所有者、管理者若しくは占有者、建築主、設計者、建築材料等を製造した者、工事監理者、工事施工者又は建築物に関する調査をした者
(i) owner, custodian, or occupant of the building or its site, building owner, designer, manufacturers of construction materials, etc., the construction superintendent or construction executor or a person who conducted a survey relating to the building;
二　第七十七条の二十一第一項の指定確認検査機関
(ii) designated confirmation and inspection body in Article 77 –21, paragraph (1);
三　第七十七条の三十五の五第一項の指定構造計算適合性判定機関
(iii) designated structural calculation conformity review body in Article 77-35-5, paragraph (1).
６　特定行政庁又は建築主事にあつては第六条第四項、第六条の二第六項、第七条第四項、第七条の三第四項、第九条第一項、第十項若しくは第十三項、第十条第一項から第三項まで、前条第一項又は第九十条の二第一項の規定の施行に必要な限度において、建築監視員にあつては第九条第十項の規定の施行に必要な限度において、当該建築物若しくは建築物の敷地の所有者、管理者若しくは占有者、建築主、設計者、建築材料等を製造した者、工事監理者、工事施工者又は建築物に関する調査をした者に対し、帳簿、書類その他の物件の提出を求めることができる。
(6) A Designated Administrative Agency or building official may require the owner, manager, or occupant of a building or site, a building owner, a designer, a manufacturer of building materials, etc., a construction superintendent, a construction executor, or a person who conducted a survey relating to the building, to submit ledgers, documents, and other objects as required for the enforcement of the provisions referred to in Article 6, paragraph (4); Article 6-2, paragraph (6); Article 7, paragraph (4); Article 7-3, paragraph (4); Article 9, paragraph (1) and 10; or Article 13; Article 10, paragraphs (1) through (3); paragraph (1) of the preceding Article; or Article 90-2, paragraph (1); and a building surveillant may as required for the enforcement of the provisions referred to in Article 9, paragraph (10).
７　建築主事又は特定行政庁の命令若しくは建築主事の委任を受けた当該市町村若しくは都道府県の職員にあつては第六条第四項、第六条の二第六項、第七条第四項、第七条の三第四項、第九条第一項、第十項若しくは第十三項、第十条第一項から第三項まで、前条第一項又は第九十条の二第一項の規定の施行に必要な限度において、建築監視員にあつては第九条第十項の規定の施行に必要な限度において、当該建築物、建築物の敷地、建築材料等を製造した者の工場、営業所、事務所、倉庫その他の事業場、建築工事場又は建築物に関する調査をした者の営業所、事務所その他の事業場に立ち入り、建築物、建築物の敷地、建築設備、建築材料、建築材料等の製造に関係がある物件、設計図書その他建築物に関する工事に関係がある物件若しくは建築物に関する調査に関係がある物件を検査し、若しくは試験し、又は建築物若しくは建築物の敷地の所有者、管理者若しくは占有者、建築主、設計者、建築材料等を製造した者、工事監理者、工事施工者若しくは建築物に関する調査をした者に対し必要な事項について質問することができる。ただし、住居に立ち入る場合においては、あらかじめ、その居住者の承諾を得なければならない。
(7) In limits necessary for a building official or that official of a city, town, village or a prefecture as ordered by the Designated Administrative Agency or entrusted by a building official, to perform execution under Article 6, paragraph (4); Article 6-2, Paragraph (6); Article 7, paragraph (4); Article 7-3, paragraph (4); Article 9, paragraphs (1), (10), or (13), Article 10, paragraphs (1) to (3); paragraph (1) of the preceding Article; or Article 90-2, paragraph (1); or in limits necessary for a building surveillant to perform execution under Article 9, paragraph (10); such person may enter the building concerned, its site, the factory, sales premises, offices, warehouse, or other place of business of the person who manufactured the construction materials, etc., or the sales premises, office, or other places of business of the person who carried out surveys relating to the construction work or building, and inspect or examine the building, its site, building equipment, building materials, objects related to the manufacture of building materials, etc., drawings/specifications, and other objects related to construction work on the building, or objects pertaining to surveys concerning the building, or may question the owner, custodian, or occupant of the building or its site, building owner or designer, superintendent, construction executor, or the person who manufactured the construction materials, etc., the construction superintendent, or a person who conducted surveys relating to the building, on any necessary items. Provided, however, that in entering a dwelling, such person must obtain the consent of the dweller in advance.
８　特定行政庁は、確認その他の建築基準法令の規定による処分並びに第一項及び第三項の規定による報告に係る建築物の敷地、構造、建築設備又は用途に関する台帳を整備し、かつ、当該台帳（当該処分及び当該報告に関する書類で国土交通省令で定めるものを含む。）を保存しなければならない。
(8) The Designated Administrative Agency must prepare the official books concerning the site, construction, building equipment, or use of a building subject to confirmation or other actions under building standard laws and regulations and reports under paragraphs (1) and (3), and must retain the relevant official books (including documents concerning the relevant action and the relevant reports that are specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order).
９　前項の台帳の記載事項その他その整備に関し必要な事項及び当該台帳（同項の国土交通省令で定める書類を含む。）の保存期間その他その保存に関し必要な事項は、国土交通省令で定める。
(9) The retention period and other necessary items concerning the retention of items recorded in the official books mentioned in the preceding paragraph, other items required for the preparation of the relevant official books, and the official records (including documents specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order in that paragraph) shall be specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（建築物調査員資格者証）
(Building Surveyor Qualification Certificate)
第十二条の二　国土交通大臣は、次の各号のいずれかに該当する者に対し、建築物調査員資格者証を交付する。
Article 12-2  (1) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism shall issue building surveyor qualification certificates to persons to whom comes under any of the following items.
一　前条第一項の調査及び同条第二項の点検（次項第四号及び第三項第三号において「調査等」という。）に関する講習で国土交通省令で定めるものの課程を修了した者
(i) a person who has completed a course of study relating to surveys as defined in paragraph (1) of the preceding Article and inspections (referred to as "surveys, etc." in Paragraph (3), item (iii)) as defined in paragraph (2) of the preceding Article, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order;
二　前号に掲げる者と同等以上の専門的知識及び能力を有すると国土交通大臣が認定した者
(ii) a person deemed by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism to possess specialized knowledge and capabilities equivalent to or better than those of a person set forth in the preceding item.
２　国土交通大臣は、前項の規定にかかわらず、次の各号のいずれかに該当する者に対しては、建築物調査員資格者証の交付を行わないことができる。
(2) Irrespective of the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may decline to issue building surveyor qualification certificates to parties coming under any of the following items.
一　未成年者
(i) a Minor;
二　建築基準法令の規定により刑に処せられ、その執行を終わり、又はその執行を受けることがなくなつた日から起算して二年を経過しない者
(ii) a person who has been sentenced to punishment pursuant to the provisions of building standard laws and regulations and for whom two years have not yet elapsed since the date on which relevant execution has been completed or has become no longer subject to execution;
三　次項（第二号を除く。）の規定により建築物調査員資格者証の返納を命ぜられ、その日から起算して一年を経過しない者
(iii) a person who has been ordered to return building surveyor qualification certificates pursuant to the provisions of the following paragraph (except Item (ii)), and for whom one year have not yet elapsed since the relevant date;
四　心身の故障により調査等の業務を適正に行うことができない者として国土交通省令で定めるもの
(iv) a person who has been specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order as a person who is incapable of performing the surveys, etc. appropriately due to mental or physical incapacitation.
３　国土交通大臣は、建築物調査員が次の各号のいずれかに該当すると認めるときは、その建築物調査員資格者証の返納を命ずることができる。
(3) If the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism finds that a building surveyor falls under any of the following items, the Minister may order the relevant surveyor to surrender of which building surveyor qualification certificate.
一　この法律又はこれに基づく命令の規定に違反したとき。
(i) if the person has committed a violation of this Act or orders based thereon;
二　前項第三号又は第四号のいずれかに該当するに至つたとき。
(ii) if the circumstances defined in item (iii) or (iv) of the preceding paragraph applies;
三　調査等に関して不誠実な行為をしたとき。
(iii) if the person has acted in bad faith in relation to surveys, etc.;
四　偽りその他不正の手段により建築物調査員資格者証の交付を受けたとき。
(iv) if deceit or other dishonest means were used to obtain a building surveyor qualification certificate.
４　建築物調査員資格者証の交付の手続その他建築物調査員資格者証に関し必要な事項は、国土交通省令で定める。
(4) The procedures for obtaining a building surveyor qualification certificate and other essential items pertaining to building surveyor qualification certificates are specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（建築設備等検査員資格者証）
(Building Equipment Inspector Qualification Certificate)
第十二条の三　建築設備等検査員資格者証の種類は、国土交通省令で定める。
Article 12-3  (1) The types of building equipment, etc., inspector qualification certificates are specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
２　建築設備等検査員が第十二条第三項の検査及び同条第四項の点検（次項第一号において「検査等」という。）を行うことができる建築設備等の種類は、前項の建築設備等検査員資格者証の種類に応じて国土交通省令で定める。
(2) The types of building equipment, etc., that a building equipment, etc., inspector can inspect under the provisions of Article 12, paragraph (3) or examine under the provisions of paragraph (4) of that Article (referred to as "inspections, etc." in item (i) of the following paragraph) are specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
３　国土交通大臣は、次の各号のいずれかに該当する者に対し、建築設備等検査員資格者証を交付する。
(3) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism will issue building equipment, etc., inspector qualification certificates to parties coming under any of the following items.
一　検査等に関する講習で建築設備等検査員資格者証の種類ごとに国土交通省令で定めるものの課程を修了した者
(i) a person who has completed courses of study relating to inspections, etc., as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order for each category of building equipment, etc., inspector qualification certificate;
二　前号に掲げる者と同等以上の専門的知識及び能力を有すると国土交通大臣が認定した者
(ii) a person deemed by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism to possess specialized knowledge and capabilities equivalent to or better than those of a person set forth in the preceding item.
４　前条第二項から第四項までの規定は、建築設備等検査員資格者証について準用する。この場合において、同条第二項中「前項」とあるのは「次条第三項」と、同項第四号及び同条第三項第三号中「調査等」とあるのは「次条第二項に規定する検査等」と読み替えるものとする。
(4) The provisions of paragraphs (2) through (4) of the preceding Article shall apply mutatis mutandis to building equipment, etc., inspector qualification certificate. In this case, "the preceding paragraph" in paragraph (2) of the preceding Article will be read as "paragraph (3)" of the following Article", and "surveys, etc." in item (iv) of that paragraph and paragraph (3), item (iii) of that Article as "inspections, etc., as provided for in paragraph (2) of the following Article.
（身分証明書の携帯）
(Carrying Identification Card)
第十三条　建築主事、建築監視員若しくは特定行政庁の命令若しくは建築主事の委任を受けた当該市町村若しくは都道府県の職員が第十二条第七項の規定によつて建築物、建築物の敷地若しくは建築工事場に立ち入る場合又は建築監視員が第九条の二（第九十条第三項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による権限を行使する場合においては、その身分を示す証明書を携帯し、関係者に提示しなければならない。
Article 13  (1) When a building official, building surveillant or that official of a city, town, village or a prefecture as ordered by the Designated Administrative Agency or entrusted by a building official enters a building, its site or construction field under the provisions of Article 12, paragraph (7), or where a building surveillant exercises the authority under Article 9-2 (including cases where this Article applies mutatis mutandis in Article 90, paragraph (3)), the official or surveillant must carry an identification card showing the status and present it to any concerned persons.
２　第十二条第七項の規定による権限は、犯罪捜査のために認められたものと解釈してはならない。
(2) The authority under Article 12, paragraph (7) must not be construed as being granted for the purpose of criminal investigation.
（都道府県知事又は国土交通大臣の勧告、助言又は援助）
(Recommendation, Advice or Assistance of Prefectural Governor or Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism)
第十四条　建築主事を置く市町村の長は、都道府県知事又は国土交通大臣に、都道府県知事は、国土交通大臣に、この法律の施行に関し必要な助言又は援助を求めることができる。
Article 14  (1) The head of a municipality having building officials may ask the prefectural governor or the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism for any necessary advice or assistance relating to the enforcement of this Act, or the prefectural governor may ask the Minister therefor.
２　国土交通大臣は、特定行政庁に対して、都道府県知事は、建築主事を置く市町村の長に対して、この法律の施行に関し必要な勧告、助言若しくは援助をし、又は必要な参考資料を提供することができる。
(2) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may give necessary recommendations, advice or assistance relating to the enforcement of this Act or furnish necessary materials to the Designated Administrative Agency, or the prefectural governor may give it or furnish them to the head of a municipality having building officials.
（届出及び統計）
(Notification and Statistics)
第十五条　建築主が建築物を建築しようとする場合又は建築物の除却の工事を施工する者が建築物を除却しようとする場合においては、これらの者は、建築主事を経由して、その旨を都道府県知事に届け出なければならない。ただし、当該建築物又は当該工事に係る部分の床面積の合計が十平方メートル以内である場合においては、この限りでない。
Article 15  (1) If a building owner intends to construct a building or a person engaged in the demolition work of buildings intends to demolish a building, such persons must notify the prefectural governor to that effect through the building official. Provided, however, that this shall not apply if the aggregate of floor areas of the relevant building or of its parts subject to the work concerned is 10 square meters or less.
２　前項の規定にかかわらず、同項の建築物の建築又は除却が第一号の耐震改修又は第二号の建替えに該当する場合における同項の届出は、それぞれ、当該各号に規定する所管行政庁が都道府県知事であるときは直接当該都道府県知事に対し、市町村の長であるときは当該市町村の長を経由して行わなければならない。
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the construction or demolition of the building in that paragraph, the notification in that paragraph in a case that corresponds to seismic retrofitting in item (i) or demolition and construction in item (ii) must be transmitted, when the competent administrative authority with jurisdiction provided for in that item is the prefectural governor, directly to the relevant prefectural governor, and when it is the head of the municipality, through the head of the relevant municipality:
一　建築物の耐震改修の促進に関する法律（平成七年法律第百二十三号）第十七条第一項の規定により建築物の耐震改修（増築又は改築に限る。）の計画の認定を同法第二条第三項の所管行政庁に申請する場合の当該耐震改修
(i) in the case of applying to the administrative authority with jurisdiction in Article 2, paragraph (3) of the Act on Promotion of Seismic Retrofitting of Buildings (Act No. 123 of 1995) is requested to approve a plan for seismic retrofitting (limited to rebuilding or addition) of a building pursuant to the provisions of Article 17, paragraph (1) of that Act, the relevant seismic retrofitting;
二　密集市街地整備法第四条第一項の規定により建替計画の認定を同項の所管行政庁に申請する場合の当該建替え
(ii) in a case where the competent administrative authority with jurisdiction under the provisions of Article 4, paragraph (1) of the Concentrated Urban Areas Development Act is requested to approve a demolition and construction plan under the provisions of that paragraph, the relevant demolition and construction.
３　市町村の長は、当該市町村の区域内における建築物が火災、震災、水災、風災その他の災害により滅失し、又は損壊した場合においては、都道府県知事に報告しなければならない。ただし、当該滅失した建築物又は損壊した建築物の損壊した部分の床面積の合計が十平方メートル以内である場合においては、この限りでない。
(3) The head of a municipality must report it to the prefectural governor, if a building within the area of the relevant city, ward, town, or village has been lost or destroyed due to a fire, earthquake, flood, storm or other disaster. Provided, however, that this shall not apply if the aggregate of floor areas of the lost building or destroyed parts of the damaged building is 10 square meters or less.
４　都道府県知事は、前三項の規定による届出及び報告に基づき、建築統計を作成し、これを国土交通大臣に送付し、かつ、関係書類を国土交通省令で定める期間保存しなければならない。
(4) The prefectural governor must prepare building statistics and forward them to the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, and must retain the relevant documents for the period specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, on the basis of the notification and report under the preceding three paragraphs.
５　前各項の規定による届出、報告並びに建築統計の作成及び送付の手続は、国土交通省令で定める。
(5) Procedures for the notification and report, and the preparation and forwarding of building statistics under the preceding each paragraph, shall be specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（報告、検査等）
(Reports, Inspections)
第十五条の二　国土交通大臣は、第一条の目的を達成するため特に必要があると認めるときは、建築物若しくは建築物の敷地の所有者、管理者若しくは占有者、建築主、設計者、建築材料等を製造した者、工事監理者、工事施工者、建築物に関する調査をした者若しくは第六十八条の十第一項の型式適合認定、第六十八条の二十五第一項の構造方法等の認定若しくは第六十八条の二十六の特殊構造方法等認定（以下この項において「型式適合認定等」という。）を受けた者に対し、建築物の敷地、構造、建築設備若しくは用途、建築材料等の受取若しくは引渡しの状況、建築物に関する工事の計画若しくは施工の状況若しくは建築物に関する調査の状況に関する報告若しくは帳簿、書類その他の物件の提出を求め、又はその職員に、建築物、建築物の敷地、建築材料等を製造した者の工場、営業所、事務所、倉庫その他の事業場、建築工事場、建築物に関する調査をした者の営業所、事務所その他の事業場若しくは型式適合認定等を受けた者の事務所その他の事業場に立ち入り、建築物、建築物の敷地、建築設備、建築材料、建築材料等の製造に関係がある物件、設計図書その他建築物に関する工事に関係がある物件、建築物に関する調査に関係がある物件若しくは型式適合認定等に関係がある物件を検査させ、若しくは試験させ、若しくは建築物若しくは建築物の敷地の所有者、管理者若しくは占有者、建築主、設計者、建築材料等を製造した者、工事監理者、工事施工者、建築物に関する調査をした者若しくは型式適合認定等を受けた者に対し必要な事項について質問させることができる。ただし、住居に立ち入る場合においては、あらかじめ、その居住者の承諾を得なければならない。
Article 15-2  (1) If the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism finds it specifically necessary in order to achieve the aims of Article 1, the Minister may request the owner, manager, or occupant of a building or site, a building owner, a designer, a manufacturer of building materials, etc., a construction superintendent, a construction executor, the parties that have conducted a survey relating to the building, the parties that have obtain type-approval (referred to in the remainder of this paragraph as "type-approval, etc.") in Article 68-10, paragraph (1), approval in Article 68-25, paragraph (1), or special structural methods approval in Article 68-26 to submit reports, ledgers, documents, and other objects relating to building site, structures, or building equipment, or use thereof, the receipt or delivery of building materials, etc., or the progress of surveys relating to plans for work relating to the building, or the construction of the building, or require staff to enter the building, the building site, the plant of the parties that have manufactured the building materials, etc., sales premises, offices, warehouses and other places of business, building construction sites, sales premises of the parties that have conducted a survey relating to the building, offices, and other places of business, or other places of business of parties that have obtained type-approval, etc., in order to inspect the building, the building site, building equipment, building materials, objects relating to the manufacturer of the building materials, etc., drawing/specifications, and other objects pertaining to work relating to the building, objects pertaining to surveys relating to the building, or objects relating to type-approval, etc., or have the owner, manager, or occupant of the building site, the building owner, the designer, the manufacturer of building materials, etc., the construction superintendent, the construction executor, or parties that have obtained type-approval, etc., ask questions about essential information. Provided, however, that prior notice must be given to residents before entering a residential property.
２　前項の規定により立入検査をする職員は、その身分を示す証明書を携帯し、関係者に提示しなければならない。
(2) Staff that enter premises to carry out inspections pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph must carry identification cards and display them to those concerned.
３　第一項の規定による権限は、犯罪捜査のために認められたものと解釈してはならない。
(3) The authority under paragraph (1) must not be construed as being granted for the purpose of criminal investigation.
（国土交通大臣又は都道府県知事への報告）
(Report to the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or Prefectural Governor)
第十六条　国土交通大臣は、特定行政庁に対して、都道府県知事は、建築主事を置く市町村の長に対して、この法律の施行に関して必要な報告又は統計の資料の提出を求めることができる。
Article 16  The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may ask the Designated Administrative Agency for the submission of reports or statistical materials necessary for the enforcement of this Act, or the prefectural governor may ask the head of a municipality having building officials therefor.
（特定行政庁等に対する指示等）
(Supervision of Designated Administrative Agencies)
第十七条　国土交通大臣は、都道府県若しくは市町村の建築主事の処分がこの法律若しくはこれに基づく命令の規定に違反し、又は都道府県若しくは市町村の建築主事がこれらの規定に基づく処分を怠つている場合において、国の利害に重大な関係がある建築物に関し必要があると認めるときは、当該都道府県知事又は市町村の長に対して、期限を定めて、都道府県又は市町村の建築主事に対し必要な措置を命ずべきことを指示することができる。
Article 17  (1) When the actions taken by a building official of a prefecture or a municipality are in violation of the provisions of this Act or those of orders based thereon, or that a building official of a prefecture or a municipality is negligent in taking the actions specified in the relevant provisions, if the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism finds it necessary with regard to a building that has a significant relationship to the interests of the Nation, the Minister may instruct the relevant prefectural governor or the head of the municipality to set a deadline and to order the building official of the prefecture or the municipality to take necessary measures.
２　国土交通大臣は、都道府県の建築主事の処分がこの法律若しくはこれに基づく命令の規定に違反し、又は都道府県の建築主事がこれらの規定に基づく処分を怠つている場合において、これらにより多数の者の生命又は身体に重大な危害が発生するおそれがあると認めるときは、当該都道府県知事に対して、期限を定めて、都道府県の建築主事に対し必要な措置を命ずべきことを指示することができる。
(2) If the actions taken by a building official of a prefecture are in violation of the provisions of this Act or those of orders based thereon, or that a building official of a prefecture is negligent in taking the actions specified in the relevant provisions, if the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism finds that these violations or negligence seriously harm to the lives or physical safety of large number of people, the Minister may instruct the relevant prefectural governor to set a deadline and to order the building official of the prefecture to take necessary measures.
３　都道府県知事は、市町村の建築主事の処分がこの法律若しくはこれに基づく命令の規定に違反し、又は市町村の建築主事がこれらの規定に基づく処分を怠つている場合において、これらにより多数の者の生命又は身体に重大な危害が発生するおそれがあると認めるときは、当該市町村の長に対して、期限を定めて、市町村の建築主事に対し必要な措置を命ずべきことを指示することができる。
(3) If the actions taken by a building official of a municipality are in violation of the provisions of this Act or those of orders based thereon, or that a building official of a municipality is negligent in taking the actions specified in the relevant provisions, if the prefectural governor finds that these violations or negligence seriously harm to the lives or physical safety of large number of people, the prefectural governor may instruct the head of the relevant municipality to set a deadline and to order the building official of the municipality to take necessary measures.
４　国土交通大臣は、前項の場合において都道府県知事がそのすべき指示をしないときは、自ら同項の指示をすることができる。
(4) When the prefectural governor fails to issue orders under the case of the preceding paragraph, the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may personally issue those orders.
５　都道府県知事又は市町村の長は、正当な理由がない限り、前各項の規定により国土交通大臣又は都道府県知事が行つた指示に従わなければならない。
(5) A prefectural governor or the head of a municipality must obey the instructions given by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or the prefectural governor pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraphs, unless there are justifiable grounds.
６　都道府県又は市町村の建築主事は、正当な理由がない限り、第一項から第四項までの規定による指示に基づく都道府県知事又は市町村の長の命令に従わなければならない。
(6) A building official of a prefecture or of a municipality must obey the orders given by the prefectural governor or the head of the municipality in response to the instructions under paragraph (1) to paragraph (4), unless are justifiable grounds.
７　国土交通大臣は、都道府県知事若しくは市町村の長が正当な理由がなく、所定の期限までに、第一項の規定による指示に従わない場合又は都道府県若しくは市町村の建築主事が正当な理由がなく、所定の期限までに、第一項の規定による国土交通大臣の指示に基づく都道府県知事若しくは市町村の長の命令に従わない場合においては、正当な理由がないことについて社会資本整備審議会の確認を得た上で、自ら当該指示に係る必要な措置をとることができる。
(7) If a prefectural governor or the head of a municipality has not obeyed the instruction under paragraph (1) by a designated deadline without justifiable grounds, or cases where the building official of a prefecture or of a municipality has not obeyed an order of a prefectural governor or the head of a municipality based on an instruction by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism under paragraph (1) by a designated deadline without justifiable grounds, the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may take necessary measures for the relevant instructions after obtaining confirmation from the Council for Social Infrastructure that there is no justifiable ground.
８　国土交通大臣は、都道府県知事若しくは市町村の長がこの法律若しくはこれに基づく命令の規定に違反し、又はこれらの規定に基づく処分を怠つている場合において、国の利害に重大な関係がある建築物に関し必要があると認めるときは、当該都道府県知事又は市町村の長に対して、期限を定めて、必要な措置をとるべきことを指示することができる。
(8) When a prefectural governor or the head of a municipality is in violation of the provisions of this Act or those of orders based thereon, or is negligent in taking the actions specified in the relevant provisions, if the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism finds it necessary with regard to a building that has a significant relationship to the interests of the Nation, the Minister may instruct the relevant prefectural governor or the head of the municipality to set a deadline and to take necessary measures.
９　国土交通大臣は、都道府県知事がこの法律若しくはこれに基づく命令の規定に違反し、又はこれらの規定に基づく処分を怠つている場合において、これらにより多数の者の生命又は身体に重大な危害が発生するおそれがあると認めるときは、当該都道府県知事に対して、期限を定めて、必要な措置をとるべきことを指示することができる。
(9) When a prefectural governor is in violation of the provisions of this Act or those of orders based thereon, or is negligent in taking the actions specified in the relevant provisions, if the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism finds that these violations or negligence seriously harm to the lives or physical safety of large number of people, the Minister may instruct the prefectural governor to set a deadline and to take necessary measures.
１０　都道府県知事は、市町村の長がこの法律若しくはこれに基づく命令の規定に違反し、又はこれらの規定に基づく処分を怠つている場合において、これらにより多数の者の生命又は身体に重大な危害が発生するおそれがあると認めるときは、当該市町村の長に対して、期限を定めて、必要な措置をとるべきことを指示することができる。
(10) When the head of a municipality is in violation of the provisions of this Act or those of orders based thereon, or is negligent in taking the actions specified in the relevant provisions, if the prefectural governor finds that these violations or negligence seriously harm to the lives or physical safety of large number of people, the prefectural governor may instruct the relevant mayor of municipality to set a deadline and to take necessary measures.
１１　第四項及び第五項の規定は、前三項の場合について準用する。この場合において、第五項中「前各項」とあるのは、「第八項から第十項まで又は第十一項において準用する第四項」と読み替えるものとする。
(11) The provisions of paragraphs (4) and (5) shall apply mutatis mutandis in the cases referred to in the preceding three paragraphs. In this case, the term, "of the preceding paragraphs" in paragraph (5) shall be replaced with, "of paragraph (4) applied mutatis mutandis in paragraphs (8) through (10) or paragraph (11)".
１２　国土交通大臣は、都道府県知事又は市町村の長が正当な理由がなく、所定の期限までに、第八項の規定による指示に従わない場合においては、正当な理由がないことについて社会資本整備審議会の確認を得た上で、自ら当該指示に係る必要な措置をとることができる。
(12) If or the head of a municipality has not obeyed the instruction under paragraph (8) by a designated deadline without justifiable grounds, the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may take necessary measures for the relevant instructions after obtaining confirmation from the Council for Social Infrastructure that there is no justifiable ground.
（国、都道府県又は建築主事を置く市町村の建築物に対する確認、検査又は是正措置に関する手続の特例）
(Special Rules regarding Procedures for Confirmation, Inspection or Corrective Measures for Buildings of State, Prefecture, or Municipality Having Building Officials)
第十八条　国、都道府県又は建築主事を置く市町村の建築物及び建築物の敷地については、第六条から第七条の六まで、第九条から第九条の三まで、第十条及び第九十条の二の規定は、適用しない。この場合においては、次項から第二十五項までの規定に定めるところによる。
Article 18  (1) With respect to buildings and building sites of the State, a prefecture, or a municipality having building officials, the provisions of Articles 6 through 7-6, Articles 9 through 9-3 and Article 10 and Article 90-2 shall not apply. In this case, the provisions of the next paragraph through paragraph (25) shall apply.
２　第六条第一項の規定によつて建築し、又は大規模の修繕若しくは大規模の模様替をしようとする建築物の建築主が国、都道府県又は建築主事を置く市町村である場合においては、当該国の機関の長等は、当該工事に着手する前に、その計画を建築主事に通知しなければならない。ただし、防火地域及び準防火地域外において建築物を増築し、改築し、又は移転しようとする場合（当該増築、改築又は移転に係る部分の床面積の合計が十平方メートル以内である場合に限る。）においては、この限りでない。
(2) If the State, a prefecture, or a municipality having building officials intends to construct a building or make major repair or remodeling under Article 6, paragraph (1), the head, etc. of the national government organs must notify the building official concerned of the plan prior to the start of the construction work therefor. Provided, however, this shall not apply if the building owner intends to add, rebuild or relocate the building to an area outside of a Fire Prevention District or of a Quasi-fire Prevention District (limited to those for which the parts related to the relevant addition, rebuilding or relocation of the relevant building have an aggregate floor area of 10 square meters or less).
３　建築主事は、前項の通知を受けた場合においては、第六条第四項に定める期間内に、当該通知に係る建築物の計画が建築基準関係規定（第六条の四第一項第一号若しくは第二号に掲げる建築物の建築、大規模の修繕若しくは大規模の模様替又は同項第三号に掲げる建築物の建築について通知を受けた場合にあつては、同項の規定により読み替えて適用される第六条第一項に規定する建築基準関係規定。以下この項及び第十四項において同じ。）に適合するかどうかを審査し、審査の結果に基づいて、建築基準関係規定に適合することを認めたときは、当該通知をした国の機関の長等に対して確認済証を交付しなければならない。
(3) The building official must examine the plan for the building as notified as to whether it conforms to the provisions related to building regulation (when a notice has been received concerning the construction, major repair, or major remodeling of a building set forth in item (i) or (ii) of Article 6-4, paragraph (1), or the construction of a building set forth in item (iii) of that paragraph, the provisions related to building regulation provided for in Article 6, paragraph (1) as applied by replacing phrases therein pursuant to the provisions of that paragraph; the same in this paragraph and paragraph (14) within that period as specified in Article 6, paragraph (4). In addition, based on the results of the inspection, if it has been confirmed that the relevant plan conforms to the provisions related to building regulation, the building official shall issue a certificate of completion of confirmation to the head, etc. of the national government organs that issued the relevant notice, after having received the notice in the preceding paragraph.
４　国の機関の長等は、第二項の場合において、同項の通知に係る建築物の計画が特定構造計算基準又は特定増改築構造計算基準に適合するかどうかの前項に規定する審査を要するものであるときは、当該建築物の計画を都道府県知事に通知し、構造計算適合性判定を求めなければならない。ただし、当該建築物の計画が特定構造計算基準（第二十条第一項第二号イの政令で定める基準に従つた構造計算で同号イに規定する方法によるものによつて確かめられる安全性を有することに係る部分のうち前項に規定する審査が比較的容易にできるものとして政令で定めるものに限る。）又は特定増改築構造計算基準（同項に規定する審査が比較的容易にできるものとして政令で定めるものに限る。）に適合するかどうかを第六条の三第一項ただし書の国土交通省令で定める要件を備える者である建築主事が前項に規定する審査をする場合は、この限りでない。
(4) In the case of paragraph (2), if the plan for the building specified in the notice in that paragraph requires the review specified in the preceding paragraph as to whether the plan for the building conform to the designated structural calculation standards or designated structural calculation standards for additions and remodeling based on the content of a notice, the head, etc. of the national government organs must notify the prefectural governor the relevant plan for the building and request the structural calculation conformity review. Provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply if a building official satisfying requirements specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order under the proviso of Article 6-3, paragraph (1) conducts review specified in the preceding paragraph whether or not the plans for the relevant building conform to the designated structural calculation standards (limited to parts relating to safety characteristics that can be confirmed by structural calculations in accordance with the standards specified by Cabinet Order referred to in Article 20, paragraph (1), item (ii), (a), using the method provided for in that item, and which are specified by Cabinet Order as the parts for which the review specified in the preceding paragraph is relatively simple) or the designated structural calculation standards for additions and remodeling (limited to those for which the review specified in that paragraph is relatively simple).
５　都道府県知事は、前項の通知を受けた場合において、当該通知に係る建築物の計画が建築基準関係規定に適合するものであることについて当該都道府県に置かれた建築主事が第三項に規定する審査をするときは、当該建築主事を当該通知に係る構造計算適合性判定に関する事務に従事させてはならない。
(5) If a prefectural governor receives an application as defined in the preceding paragraph, and a building official located in the relevant prefecture will carry out the review provided for in paragraph (3) to determine whether or not the plan for the building conforms to the relevant provisions of the building standards, the relevant prefectural governor must not allow the relevant building official to engage in affairs relating to the structural calculation review pertaining to the relevant notice.
６　都道府県知事は、特別な構造方法の建築物の計画について第四項の構造計算適合性判定を行うに当たつて必要があると認めるときは、当該構造方法に係る構造計算に関して専門的な識見を有する者の意見を聴くものとする。
(6) If a prefectural governor finds it necessary to perform the structural calculation conformity review in paragraph (4) for the plan for a building with a special construction method, the prefectural governor hears the opinions of parties with expert knowledge concerning the structural calculation of the relevant construction method.
７　都道府県知事は、第四項の通知を受けた場合においては、その通知を受けた日から十四日以内に、当該通知に係る構造計算適合性判定の結果を記載した通知書を当該通知をした国の機関の長等に交付しなければならない。
(7) When a prefectural governor has received a notice as referred to in paragraph (4), the prefectural governor must issue a written notice of the results of the structural calculation review referred to in the relevant notice to the head, etc., of the national government organs, within fourteen days from the day that the relevant structural calculation conformity review was requested.
８　都道府県知事は、前項の場合（第四項の通知に係る建築物の計画が特定構造計算基準（第二十条第一項第二号イの政令で定める基準に従つた構造計算で同号イに規定する方法によるものによつて確かめられる安全性を有することに係る部分に限る。）に適合するかどうかの判定を求められた場合その他国土交通省令で定める場合に限る。）において、前項の期間内に当該通知をした国の機関の長等に同項の通知書を交付することができない合理的な理由があるときは、三十五日の範囲内において、同項の期間を延長することができる。この場合においては、その旨及びその延長する期間並びにその期間を延長する理由を記載した通知書を同項の期間内に当該通知をした国の機関の長等に交付しなければならない。
(8) In the case of the preceding paragraph (limited to those for which a review is requested to ascertain whether or not the plan for the building relating to the notice in paragraph (4) conforms to the designated structural calculation standards (limited to parts relating to the safety that can be confirmed by structural calculations in accordance with the standards specified by Cabinet Order referred to in Article 20, paragraph (1), item (ii), (a), using the method provided for in (a) of that item) and other cases specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order), there are reasonable grounds why the prefectural governor cannot issue the written notice in that paragraph to the head, etc., of the national government organs that submitted the notice within the period in the preceding paragraph, the prefectural governor may extend the period to 35 days. In this case, the prefectural governor must issue a written notice stating this fact and the period of the extension, and the reason for the extension of the period to head, etc., of the national government organs that gave the notice within the period in that paragraph.
９　都道府県知事は、第七項の場合において、第四項の通知の記載によつては当該建築物の計画が特定構造計算基準又は特定増改築構造計算基準に適合するかどうかを決定することができない正当な理由があるときは、その旨及びその理由を記載した通知書を第七項の期間（前項の規定により第七項の期間を延長した場合にあつては、当該延長後の期間）内に当該通知をした国の機関の長等に交付しなければならない。
(9) In the case of paragraph (7), if there are justifiable grounds to be unable to decide whether the plan for the building conform to the designated structural calculation standards or designated structural calculation standards for additions and remodeling based on information in a notice in paragraph (4), the prefectural governor must issue a written notice stating this fact and the reasons to the head, etc. of the national government organs that made the relevant notice within the period in paragraph (7) (when the period in paragraph (7) has been extended pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the period after the relevant extension).
１０　国の機関の長等は、第七項の規定により同項の通知書の交付を受けた場合において、当該通知書が適合判定通知書であるときは、第三項の規定による審査をする建築主事に、当該適合判定通知書又はその写しを提出しなければならない。ただし、当該建築物の計画に係る第十四項の通知書の交付を受けた場合は、この限りでない。
(10) If the head, etc., of the national government organs receives a written notice pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (7) and the relevant notice is a conformance review notice, the relevant conformance review notice or a copy thereof must be provided to the building official that conducts examination under paragraph (3). Provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply if a written notice relating to the relevant plan for the building has been issued under the provisions of Article 14.
１１　国の機関の長等は、前項の場合において、第三項の期間（第十三項の規定により第三項の期間が延長された場合にあつては、当該延長後の期間）の末日の三日前までに、前項の適合判定通知書又はその写しを当該建築主事に提出しなければならない。
(11) The head, etc. of the national government organs must submit a conformity review notice or a copy thereof to the building official no later than three days before the final day of the period in paragraph (3) (if the period in paragraph (3) has been extended pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (13), the extended period), under the case of the preceding paragraph.
１２　建築主事は、第三項の場合において、第二項の通知に係る建築物の計画が第四項の構造計算適合性判定を要するものであるときは、当該通知をした国の機関の長等から第十項の適合判定通知書又はその写しの提出を受けた場合に限り、第三項の確認済証を交付することができる。
(12) In the case of paragraph (3), if a structural calculation review under the provisions of paragraph (4) is required for the plan for the building specified in the notice in paragraph (2), the building official may issue a certificate of completion of confirmation in paragraph (3), if and only if a conformity review notice or a copy thereof has been received from the head, etc., of the national government organs.
１３　建築主事は、第三項の場合（第二項の通知に係る建築物の計画が特定構造計算基準（第二十条第一項第二号イの政令で定める基準に従つた構造計算で同号イに規定する方法によるものによつて確かめられる安全性を有することに係る部分に限る。）に適合するかどうかを審査する場合その他国土交通省令で定める場合に限る。）において、第三項の期間内に当該通知をした国の機関の長等に同項の確認済証を交付することができない合理的な理由があるときは、三十五日の範囲内において、同項の期間を延長することができる。この場合においては、その旨及びその延長する期間並びにその期間を延長する理由を記載した通知書を同項の期間内に当該通知をした国の機関の長等に交付しなければならない。
(13) In the case in paragraph (3) (limited to those for which a review to be performed as to whether the plan for the building specified in the notice in paragraph (2) conforms to the designated structural calculation standards (limited to parts relating to the safety that can be confirmed by structural calculations in accordance with the standards specified by Cabinet Order referred to in Article 20, paragraph (1), item (ii), (a), using the method provided for in (a) of that item) and other cases specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order), when there are reasonable grounds why the building official cannot issue the certificate of completion of confirmation in that paragraph to the head etc. of the national government organs that issued the relevant notice, by the end of the period in paragraph (3), the building official may extend the period in that paragraph within a range of thirty-five days. In this case, the prefectural governor must issue a written notice stating this fact and the period of the extension, and the reason for the extension of the period to head, etc., of the national government organs that gave the notice within the period in that paragraph.
１４　建築主事は、第三項の場合において、第二項の通知に係る建築物の計画が建築基準関係規定に適合しないことを認めたとき、又は建築基準関係規定に適合するかどうかを決定することができない正当な理由があるときは、その旨及びその理由を記載した通知書を第三項の期間（前項の規定により第三項の期間を延長した場合にあつては、当該延長後の期間）内に当該通知をした国の機関の長等に交付しなければならない。
(14) In the case of paragraph (3), if the building official concludes that the plan for the building in a notice in paragraph (2) does not conform to the provisions related to building regulation, or if there are justifiable grounds to be unable to decide whether it conforms to the provisions related to building regulation, the building official must issue a written notice stating this fact and the reasons to the head, etc. of the national government organs that made the relevant notice within the period in paragraph (3) (when the period in paragraph (3) has been extended pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the period after the relevant extension).
１５　第二項の通知に係る建築物の建築、大規模の修繕又は大規模の模様替の工事は、第三項の確認済証の交付を受けた後でなければすることができない。
(15) The construction, major repair, or major remodeling of a building as notified under paragraph (2) shall not be executed before a certificate of completion of confirmation in paragraph (3) has been received.
１６　国の機関の長等は、当該工事を完了した場合においては、その旨を、工事が完了した日から四日以内に到達するように、建築主事に通知しなければならない。
(16) The head, etc. of the national government organs must notify the building official concerned to that effect within four days from the day of that completion, upon completion of the construction work concerned.
１７　建築主事が前項の規定による通知を受けた場合においては、建築主事等は、その通知を受けた日から七日以内に、その通知に係る建築物及びその敷地が建築基準関係規定（第七条の五に規定する建築物の建築、大規模の修繕又は大規模の模様替の工事について通知を受けた場合にあつては、第六条の四第一項の規定により読み替えて適用される第六条第一項に規定する建築基準関係規定。以下この条において同じ。）に適合しているかどうかを検査しなければならない。
(17) When a building official has received a notice under the preceding paragraph, the building official, etc. must inspect the building and its site as notified as to whether they conform to the provisions related to building regulation (when a notice has been received concerning the construction, major repair, or major remodeling of a building provided for in Article 7-5, the provisions related to building regulation provided for in Article 6, paragraph (1) as applied by replacing phrases therein pursuant to the provisions of Article 6-4, paragraph (1); the same in this Article) within seven days from the day of receipt of the relevant notice.
１８　建築主事等は、前項の規定による検査をした場合において、当該建築物及びその敷地が建築基準関係規定に適合していることを認めたときは、国の機関の長等に対して検査済証を交付しなければならない。
(18) The building official, etc. must give the head, etc. of the national government organs a certificate of final inspection, after having made an inspection under the preceding paragraph and confirming that the relevant building and its site conform to the provisions related to building regulation.
１９　国の機関の長等は、当該工事が特定工程を含む場合において、当該特定工程に係る工事を終えたときは、その都度、その旨を、その日から四日以内に到達するように、建築主事に通知しなければならない。
(19) When the relevant construction work includes a designated construction process which has been completed, the head, etc. of the national government organs must notify the building official to that effect so that the building official receives the notice within four days of that day, on all that occasions.
２０　建築主事が前項の規定による通知を受けた場合においては、建築主事等は、その通知を受けた日から四日以内に、当該通知に係る工事中の建築物等について、検査前に施工された工事に係る建築物の部分及びその敷地が建築基準関係規定に適合するかどうかを検査しなければならない。
(20) When a building official has received a notice under the preceding paragraph, the building official, etc. must inspect the building under construction in the relevant notice as to whether parts of the relevant building and its site executed prior to the inspection of the building conforms to the provisions related to building regulation within four days after receiving the notice.
２１　建築主事等は、前項の規定による検査をした場合において、工事中の建築物等が建築基準関係規定に適合することを認めたときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、国の機関の長等に対して当該特定工程に係る中間検査合格証を交付しなければならない。
(21) When the building official, etc. has performed an inspection under the preceding paragraph and has confirmed the fact that the building, etc. under construction work conforms to the provisions related to building regulation, the building official, etc. must issue a certificate of interim inspection concerning the relevant special construction process to the head, etc. of the national government organs. as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
２２　特定工程後の工程に係る工事は、前項の規定による当該特定工程に係る中間検査合格証の交付を受けた後でなければ、これを施工してはならない。
(22) Construction work which follows a designated construction process must not be executed until the certificate of interim inspection concerning the relevant designated construction process under the preceding paragraph has been issued.
２３　建築主事等は、第二十項の規定による検査において建築基準関係規定に適合することを認められた工事中の建築物等について、第十七項又は第二十項の規定による検査をするときは、同項の規定による検査において建築基準関係規定に適合することを認められた建築物の部分及びその敷地については、これらの規定による検査をすることを要しない。
(23) When a building official performs an inspection under paragraph (17) or (20) of a building etc. under construction of which parts' conformity with the provisions related to building regulation has been confirmed by an inspection under paragraph (20), it shall not be necessary to perform an inspection under that paragraph of the parts of the building and its site that were confirmed to be in conformity with the provisions related to the building regulations by an inspection under that paragraph.
２４　第六条第一項第一号から第三号までの建築物を新築する場合又はこれらの建築物（共同住宅以外の住宅及び居室を有しない建築物を除く。）の増築、改築、移転、大規模の修繕若しくは大規模の模様替の工事で避難施設等に関する工事を含むものをする場合においては、第十八項の検査済証の交付を受けた後でなければ、当該新築に係る建築物又は当該避難施設等に関する工事に係る建築物若しくは建築物の部分を使用し、又は使用させてはならない。ただし、次の各号のいずれかに該当する場合には、検査済証の交付を受ける前においても、仮に、当該建築物又は建築物の部分を使用し、又は使用させることができる。
(24) If buildings as mentioned in Article 6, paragraph (1) items (i) through (iii) are newly constructed, or where construction work for the addition, rebuilding, relocation, major repair or major remodeling of those buildings (excluding houses other than apartment houses and buildings which have no habitable rooms) includes construction work on evacuation facilities, etc., no person shall use or cause to be used the building pertaining to the relevant new building or the building or its parts subject to construction work on evacuation facilities, etc. until that person obtains a certificate of final inspection under paragraph (18). Provided, however, that in cases of any of the following items, that person may use or let someone use the relevant building or its parts temporarily even before obtaining the certificate of inspection:
一　特定行政庁が、安全上、防火上又は避難上支障がないと認めたとき。
(i) where the Designated Administrative Agency has determined that there is no objection from the viewpoint of safety, fire prevention, or evacuation;
二　建築主事が、安全上、防火上及び避難上支障がないものとして国土交通大臣が定める基準に適合していることを認めたとき。
(ii) if a building official deems that conformity to the standards defined by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism has been achieved on the basis that there is no objection from the viewpoint of safety, fire prevention, or evacuation;
三　第十六項の規定による通知をした日から七日を経過したとき。
(iii) where seven days have elapsed from the day on which the notice under paragraph (16) was made.
２５　特定行政庁は、国、都道府県又は建築主事を置く市町村の建築物又は建築物の敷地が第九条第一項、第十条第一項若しくは第三項又は第九十条の二第一項の規定に該当すると認める場合においては、直ちに、その旨を当該建築物又は建築物の敷地を管理する国の機関の長等に通知し、これらの規定に掲げる必要な措置をとるべきことを要請しなければならない。
(25) If the Designated Administrative Agency concludes that a building or its site of the State, a prefecture, or a municipality having building officials falls under the provisions of Article 9, paragraph (1), Article 10, paragraph (1) or (3) or Article 90-2, paragraph (1), it must immediately notify head, etc. of the national government organs in charge of the relevant building or its site, to that effect, and request to take the necessary measures set forth in the relevant provisions.
（指定構造計算適合性判定機関による構造計算適合性判定の実施）
(Performance of a Structural Calculation Review by a Designated Structural Calculation Review Body)
第十八条の二　都道府県知事は、第七十七条の三十五の二から第七十七条の三十五の五までの規定の定めるところにより国土交通大臣又は都道府県知事が指定する者に、第六条の三第一項及び前条第四項の構造計算適合性判定の全部又は一部を行わせることができる。
Article 18-2  (1) A prefectural governor may have a person designated by the prefectural governor or Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism in accordance with the provisions referred to in Articles 77-35-2 through 77-35-5 to perform all or part of the structural calculation conformity review under the provisions of Article 6-3, paragraph (1) and paragraph (4) of the preceding Article.
２　前項の規定による指定は、二以上の都道府県の区域において同項の規定による構造計算適合性判定の業務を行おうとする者を指定する場合にあつては国土交通大臣が、一の都道府県の区域において同項の規定による構造計算適合性判定の業務を行おうとする者を指定する場合にあつては都道府県知事がするものとする。
(2) Designation under the preceding paragraph shall be performed by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism if the person designated will engage in structural calculation review work under that paragraph in an area spanning two or more prefectures, or by the prefectural governor if the person designated will engage in structural calculation review work under that paragraph in an area in one prefecture.
３　都道府県知事は、第一項の規定による指定を受けた者に構造計算適合性判定の全部又は一部を行わせることとしたときは、当該構造計算適合性判定の全部又は一部を行わないものとする。
(3) If a prefectural governor decides to have all or part of structural calculation conformity review work carried out by a person designated under paragraph (1), the prefectural governor shall not carry out all or part of the relevant structural calculation conformity review work.
４　第一項の規定による指定を受けた者が構造計算適合性判定を行う場合における第六条の三第一項及び第三項から第六項まで並びに前条第四項及び第六項から第九項までの規定の適用については、これらの規定中「都道府県知事」とあるのは、「第十八条の二第一項の規定による指定を受けた者」とする。
(4) In applying the provisions referred to in Article 6-3, paragraph (1) and paragraphs (3) through (6), and paragraph (4) and paragraphs (6) through (9) of the preceding Article in a case where a person designated under paragraph (1) performs a structural calculation conformity review, "prefectural governor" in these provisions shall be read as "person designated under Article 18-2, paragraph (1)."
（確認審査等に関する指針等）
(Guidelines Concerning Confirmation Examination)
第十八条の三　国土交通大臣は、第六条第四項及び第十八条第三項（これらの規定を第八十七条第一項、第八十七条の四並びに第八十八条第一項及び第二項において準用する場合を含む。）に規定する審査、第六条の二第一項（第八十七条第一項、第八十七条の四並びに第八十八条第一項及び第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による確認のための審査、第六条の三第一項及び第十八条第四項に規定する構造計算適合性判定、第七条第四項、第七条の二第一項及び第十八条第十七項（これらの規定を第八十七条の四並びに第八十八条第一項及び第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による検査並びに第七条の三第四項、第七条の四第一項及び第十八条第二十項（これらの規定を第八十七条の四及び第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による検査（以下この条及び第七十七条の六十二第二項第三号において「確認審査等」という。）の公正かつ適確な実施を確保するため、確認審査等に関する指針を定めなければならない。
Article 18-3  (1) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism must provide a guideline concerning confirmation examination, etc., in order to ensure that an examination under Article 6, paragraph (4) and Article 18, paragraph (3) (including cases where these provisions are applied mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (1), Article 87-2, and Article 88, paragraphs (1) and (2)), an examination to perform a confirmation under Article 6-2 paragraph (1) (including cases where these provisions are applied mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (1), Article 87-2, and Article 88, paragraphs (1) and (2)), the structural calculation conformity review under Article 6, paragraph (5), Article 6-3, paragraph (1), and Article 18, paragraph (4), the inspection under Article 7, paragraph (4), Article 7-2, paragraph (1) and Article 18, paragraph (17) (including cases where these provisions are applied mutatis mutandis in Article 87-2 and Article 88, paragraphs (1) and (2)), and the inspection under the provisions of Article 7-3, paragraph (4), Article 7-4, paragraph (1), and Article 18, paragraph (20) (including cases where these provisions are applied mutatis mutandis in Article 87-2 and Article 88, paragraph (1)) (referred to as "confirmation examination, etc." hereinafter in this Article and in Article 77-62, paragraph (2) item (iii)) are performed fairly and appropriately.
２　国土交通大臣は、前項の指針を定め、又はこれを変更したときは、遅滞なく、これを公表しなければならない。
(2) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism has prescribed the policy of the preceding paragraph or changed it, the Minister must publicize to that effect without delay.
３　確認審査等は、前項の規定により公表された第一項の指針に従つて行わなければならない。
(3) A confirmation examination, etc. must be performed in conformity with the guideline under paragraph (1) that was the subject of the public notice pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph.
第二章　建築物の敷地、構造及び建築設備
Chapter II Site, Construction and Building Equipment of Buildings
（敷地の衛生及び安全）
(Sanitation and Safety of Sites)
第十九条　建築物の敷地は、これに接する道の境より高くなければならず、建築物の地盤面は、これに接する周囲の土地より高くなければならない。ただし、敷地内の排水に支障がない場合又は建築物の用途により防湿の必要がない場合においては、この限りでない。
Article 19  (1) Sites of buildings must be higher than the border of roads adjacent thereto, and ground levels of buildings must be higher than adjacent land lots. Provided, however, this shall not apply if there is no impediment to drainage within the sites or there is no necessity for damp-proofing because of the use of the buildings.
２　湿潤な土地、出水のおそれの多い土地又はごみその他これに類する物で埋め立てられた土地に建築物を建築する場合においては、盛土、地盤の改良その他衛生上又は安全上必要な措置を講じなければならない。
(2) If buildings are to be constructed on damp land, land frequently threatened by flood or land reclaimed with rubbish or other matter similar thereto, fills, an improvement of ground or other measures necessary for sanitation or safety must be taken.
３　建築物の敷地には、雨水及び汚水を排出し、又は処理するための適当な下水管、下水溝又はためますその他これらに類する施設をしなければならない。
(3) Sites of buildings must have proper sewer pipelines, sewer channels, manholes and other facilities similar thereto for the purpose of draining and disposing of rainwater and wastewater.
４　建築物ががけ崩れ等による被害を受けるおそれのある場合においては、擁壁の設置その他安全上適当な措置を講じなければならない。
(4) If buildings are likely to be damaged by landslides, etc., retaining walls shall be constructed and other appropriate measures for safety must be taken.
（構造耐力）
(Structural Capacity)
第二十条　建築物は、自重、積載荷重、積雪荷重、風圧、土圧及び水圧並びに地震その他の震動及び衝撃に対して安全な構造のものとして、次の各号に掲げる建築物の区分に応じ、それぞれ当該各号に定める基準に適合するものでなければならない。
Article 20  (1) Buildings shall conform to the following criteria provided for in the following items respectively according to classification of the building set forth in each of following items specified below as being structurally safe from dead load, live load, snow load, wind load, ground pressure and water pressure, and earthquakes or other vibration or impact.
一　高さが六十メートルを超える建築物　当該建築物の安全上必要な構造方法に関して政令で定める技術的基準に適合するものであること。この場合において、その構造方法は、荷重及び外力によつて建築物の各部分に連続的に生ずる力及び変形を把握することその他の政令で定める基準に従つた構造計算によつて安全性が確かめられたものとして国土交通大臣の認定を受けたものであること。
(i) building higher than 60 meters: It shall conform to technical criteria established by Cabinet Order concerning structural methods necessary for safety of the relevant building. In this case, its structural method shall be approved by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism as a structural method of which safety has been confirmed by structural calculations that conform with criteria specified by Cabinet Order such as clarifying forces and deformation produced continuously in each part of the building by loads and external forces;
二　高さが六十メートル以下の建築物のうち、第六条第一項第二号に掲げる建築物（高さが十三メートル又は軒の高さが九メートルを超えるものに限る。）又は同項第三号に掲げる建築物（地階を除く階数が四以上である鉄骨造の建築物、高さが二十メートルを超える鉄筋コンクリート造又は鉄骨鉄筋コンクリート造の建築物その他これらの建築物に準ずるものとして政令で定める建築物に限る。）　次に掲げる基準のいずれかに適合するものであること。
(ii) of buildings lower than 60 meters, buildings set forth in Article 6, paragraph (1), item (ii) (limited to those with height higher than 13 meters or eave height higher than 9 meters) or buildings set forth in item (iii) of that paragraph (limited to steel structure buildings with four or more stories excluding the basements, reinforced concrete structure or steel encased reinforced concrete structure buildings with height higher than 20 meters and other buildings specified by Cabinet Order as equivalent to these buildings): it shall conform with one of the following criteria;
イ　当該建築物の安全上必要な構造方法に関して政令で定める技術的基準に適合すること。この場合において、その構造方法は、地震力によつて建築物の地上部分の各階に生ずる水平方向の変形を把握することその他の政令で定める基準に従つた構造計算で、国土交通大臣が定めた方法によるもの又は国土交通大臣の認定を受けたプログラムによるものによつて確かめられる安全性を有すること。
(a) it conforms to the technical criteria established by Cabinet Order concerning structural methods necessary for the safety of the relevant building. In this case, this structural method shall have safety confirmed by structural calculations that conform with criteria such as clarifying the horizontal deformation produced in each story of the above ground part of the building by earthquake force or other criteria specified by Cabinet Order, and is based either on a method that has been established by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or on a program that has been approved by the Minister;
ロ　前号に定める基準に適合すること。
(b) it conforms to the criteria provided for by the preceding item.
三　高さが六十メートル以下の建築物のうち、第六条第一項第二号又は第三号に掲げる建築物その他その主要構造部（床、屋根及び階段を除く。）を石造、れんが造、コンクリートブロック造、無筋コンクリート造その他これらに類する構造とした建築物で高さが十三メートル又は軒の高さが九メートルを超えるもの（前号に掲げる建築物を除く。）　次に掲げる基準のいずれかに適合するものであること。
(iii) of buildings lower than 60 meters, buildings set forth in Article 6, paragraph (1), item (ii) or (iii) and other buildings with their principal structural parts (excluding floors, roofs, and stairways) that are stone structures, brick structures, concrete block structures, plain concrete structure or other structure similar thereto and with height higher than 13 meters or eave height higher than 9 meters (excluding the buildings set forth in the preceding item): It shall conform with one of the following criteria.;
イ　当該建築物の安全上必要な構造方法に関して政令で定める技術的基準に適合すること。この場合において、その構造方法は、構造耐力上主要な部分ごとに応力度が許容応力度を超えないことを確かめることその他の政令で定める基準に従つた構造計算で、国土交通大臣が定めた方法によるもの又は国土交通大臣の認定を受けたプログラムによるものによつて確かめられる安全性を有すること。
(a) it conforms to the technical criteria established by Cabinet Order concerning structural method necessary for the safety of the relevant building. In this case, this structural method shall have safety confirmed by structural calculations that conform with criteria such as confirming that the stress in each main part of structural resistance does not exceed the allowable unit stress or other criteria specified by Cabinet Order, and is based either on a method that has been established by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or on a program that has been approved by the Minister;
ロ　前二号に定める基準のいずれかに適合すること。
(b) it conforms to one of the criteria specified by the preceding two items.
四　前三号に掲げる建築物以外の建築物　次に掲げる基準のいずれかに適合するものであること。
(iv) building other than the buildings set forth in the preceding three items: it conforms to one of the following criteria.
イ　当該建築物の安全上必要な構造方法に関して政令で定める技術的基準に適合すること。
(a) it confirms to technical criteria established by Cabinet Order concerning structural methods necessary for the safety of the relevant building;
ロ　前三号に定める基準のいずれかに適合すること。
(b) it conforms to one of the criteria in the preceding three items.
２　前項に規定する基準の適用上一の建築物であつても別の建築物とみなすことができる部分として政令で定める部分が二以上ある建築物の当該建築物の部分は、同項の規定の適用については、それぞれ別の建築物とみなす。
(2) Even if a building is a single building, for the purpose of applying the standards specified in the preceding paragraph, if the relevant building has two or more parts that are deemed to be separate buildings under the provisions of Cabinet Order, each shall be deemed to be separate buildings for the purpose of applying the provisions referred to in relevant paragraph.
（大規模の建築物の主要構造部等）
(Principal Building Parts of Large-scale Buildings)
第二十一条　次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物（その主要構造部（床、屋根及び階段を除く。）の政令で定める部分の全部又は一部に木材、プラスチックその他の可燃材料を用いたものに限る。）は、その主要構造部を通常火災終了時間（建築物の構造、建築設備及び用途に応じて通常の火災が消火の措置により終了するまでに通常要する時間をいう。）が経過するまでの間当該火災による建築物の倒壊及び延焼を防止するために主要構造部に必要とされる性能に関して政令で定める技術的基準に適合するもので、国土交通大臣が定めた構造方法を用いるもの又は国土交通大臣の認定を受けたものとしなければならない。ただし、その周囲に延焼防止上有効な空地で政令で定める技術的基準に適合するものを有する建築物については、この限りでない。
Article 21  (1) Buildings coming under any of the following items (limited to those using wood, plastic or other combustible materials for all or part of their principal building parts (excluding floors, roofs and stairs) specified by Cabinet Order) shall conform to the technical criteria established by Cabinet Order concerning the performance required for the principal building parts in order to prevent the destruction of relevant buildings or their catching fire during the period that a normal fire will burn (which means the time normally required for a normal fire to be extinguished by firefighting measures according to the construction, building equipment and use of the building), and which use construction methods established by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or which were approved by the Minister. Provided, however, this shall not apply to buildings that have open space in the area surrounding the building that is effective for the prevention of the spread of fire and conforms to the technical criteria established by Cabinet Order.
一　地階を除く階数が四以上である建築物
(i) buildings with four or more stories, excluding basements;
二　高さが十六メートルを超える建築物
(ii) buildings exceeding 16 meters in height;
三　別表第一（い）欄（五）項又は（六）項に掲げる用途に供する特殊建築物で、高さが十三メートルを超えるもの
(iii) special buildings for use set forth in column (a), row (5) or (6) of Appended Table 1, exceeding 13 meters in height.
２　延べ面積が三千平方メートルを超える建築物（その主要構造部（床、屋根及び階段を除く。）の前項の政令で定める部分の全部又は一部に木材、プラスチックその他の可燃材料を用いたものに限る。）は、次の各号のいずれかに適合するものとしなければならない。
(2) Buildings exceeding 3,000 square meters in total floor area (limited to those for which all or part of the principal building parts (excluding floors, roofs, and stairs) specified by Cabinet Order in the preceding paragraph are made of wood, plastic, or other combustible materials) shall conform to the criteria provided for in any of the following items.
一　第二条第九号の二イに掲げる基準に適合するものであること。
(i) parts must conform to the standards set forth in Article 2, item (ix)-2, (a);
二　壁、柱、床その他の建築物の部分又は防火戸その他の政令で定める防火設備（以下この号において「壁等」という。）のうち、通常の火災による延焼を防止するために当該壁等に必要とされる性能に関して政令で定める技術的基準に適合するもので、国土交通大臣が定めた構造方法を用いるもの又は国土交通大臣の認定を受けたものによつて有効に区画し、かつ、各区画の床面積の合計をそれぞれ三千平方メートル以内としたものであること。
(ii) walls, columns, floors and other building parts or fire doors and other protective assemblies defined in a Cabinet Order (hereinafter referred to as "walls, etc.") must conform to the technical standards specified by Cabinet Order concerning the required performance of walls, etc., in preventing the spread of a normal fire and be effectively separated using construction methods established by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or was approved by the Minister. The aggregate floor area in each separated area must not exceed 3,000 square meters.
（屋根）
(Roofs)
第二十二条　特定行政庁が防火地域及び準防火地域以外の市街地について指定する区域内にある建築物の屋根の構造は、通常の火災を想定した火の粉による建築物の火災の発生を防止するために屋根に必要とされる性能に関して建築物の構造及び用途の区分に応じて政令で定める技術的基準に適合するもので、国土交通大臣が定めた構造方法を用いるもの又は国土交通大臣の認定を受けたものとしなければならない。ただし、茶室、あずまやその他これらに類する建築物又は延べ面積が十平方メートル以内の物置、納屋その他これらに類する建築物の屋根の延焼のおそれのある部分以外の部分については、この限りでない。
Article 22  (1) The construction of roofs of buildings within areas designated by the Designated Administrative Agency in urban areas excluding Fire Prevention Districts and Quasi-fire Prevention Districts shall conform to technical criteria established by Cabinet Order according to the construction and the category of use of the building concerning the performance necessary for a roof to prevent the occurrence of a fire in the building caused by burning brands assumed to accompany a normal fire, and which use construction methods established by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or which were approved by the Minister. Provided, however, that this shall not apply to the roof except for the part thereof liable to catch fire in the case of tea ceremony houses, summerhouses and other buildings similar thereto or in the case of storerooms, barns and other buildings similar thereto of which total floor area does not exceed 10 square meters, this shall not apply to the roof except for the part thereof liable to catch fire.
２　特定行政庁は、前項の規定による指定をする場合においては、あらかじめ、都市計画区域内にある区域については都道府県都市計画審議会（市町村都市計画審議会が置かれている市町村の長たる特定行政庁が行う場合にあつては、当該市町村都市計画審議会。第五十一条を除き、以下同じ。）の意見を聴き、その他の区域については関係市町村の同意を得なければならない。
(2) When prior to designation under the preceding paragraph, the Designated Administrative Agency must hear the opinion of the Prefectural City Planning Council (if this is done by the Designated Administrative Agency that is the head of a municipality with Municipal City Planning Council, the relevant Municipal City Planning Council; the same applies hereinafter excluding Article 51) with respect to areas within City Planning Areas, and must obtain the consent of the municipality concerned with respect to other areas.
（外壁）
(Exterior Walls)
第二十三条　前条第一項の市街地の区域内にある建築物（その主要構造部の第二十一条第一項の政令で定める部分が木材、プラスチックその他の可燃材料で造られたもの（第二十五条及び第六十一条において「木造建築物等」という。）に限る。）は、その外壁で延焼のおそれのある部分の構造を、準防火性能（建築物の周囲において発生する通常の火災による延焼の抑制に一定の効果を発揮するために外壁に必要とされる性能をいう。）に関して政令で定める技術的基準に適合する土塗壁その他の構造で、国土交通大臣が定めた構造方法を用いるもの又は国土交通大臣の認定を受けたものとしなければならない。
Article 23  With respect to buildings within urban areas in paragraph (1) of the preceding Article (limited to those which principal building parts specified by Cabinet Order under Article 21, paragraph (1) are made of that combustible materials as wood, plastic, etc. (referred to as "wooden buildings, etc." in Article 25, and Article 61), the part of exterior walls liable to catch fire shall be of earth-plaster wall construction or other construction method which conforms to technical criteria established by Cabinet Order concerning quasi fire-preventive performance (performance required for an exterior wall to effectively prevent fire spreading under the effects of a normal fire occurring in the area surrounding the building) and which uses construction methods established by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or which was approved by the Minister.
（建築物が第二十二条第一項の市街地の区域の内外にわたる場合の措置）
(Measures for Buildings Extending Outside Urban Areas as Specified in Article 22, Paragraph (1))
第二十四条　建築物が第二十二条第一項の市街地の区域の内外にわたる場合においては、その全部について同項の市街地の区域内の建築物に関する規定を適用する。
Article 24  If buildings in urban areas as specified in Article 22, paragraph (1) extend outside thereof, the provisions applicable to buildings in urban areas under that paragraph shall apply to the whole building.
（大規模の木造建築物等の外壁等）
(Exterior Walls of Large-scale Wooden Buildings)
第二十五条　延べ面積（同一敷地内に二以上の木造建築物等がある場合においては、その延べ面積の合計）が千平方メートルを超える木造建築物等は、その外壁及び軒裏で延焼のおそれのある部分を防火構造とし、その屋根の構造を第二十二条第一項に規定する構造としなければならない。
Article 25  With respect to wooden buildings, etc. of which total floor area (or the aggregate of total floor areas if there are two or more wooden buildings etc. on the same site) exceeds 1,000 square meters, the part of exterior walls or soffits liable to catch fire must be of fire preventive construction and roofs must be of construction as specified in Article 22, paragraph (1).
（防火壁等）
(Fire Walls)
第二十六条　延べ面積が千平方メートルを超える建築物は、防火上有効な構造の防火壁又は防火床によつて有効に区画し、かつ、各区画の床面積の合計をそれぞれ千平方メートル以内としなければならない。ただし、次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物については、この限りでない。
Article 26  Any building exceeding 1,000 square meters in total floor area must be effectively separated by fire walls or fire floors of that construction as is effective for fire safety and the aggregate of floor areas of each separated part shall not exceed 1,000 square meters. Provided, however, that this shall not apply to buildings coming under any of the following items:
一　耐火建築物又は準耐火建築物
(i) fire-resistive or quasi fire-resistive buildings;
二　卸売市場の上家、機械製作工場その他これらと同等以上に火災の発生のおそれが少ない用途に供する建築物で、次のイ又はロのいずれかに該当するもの
(ii) sheds of wholesale markets, machinery manufacturing factories or other buildings of which use involves equal or less danger of outbreak of fire than these buildings, which come under either (a) or (b);
イ　主要構造部が不燃材料で造られたものその他これに類する構造のもの
(a) buildings of which principal building parts are made of noncombustible materials and buildings of similar construction thereto;
ロ　構造方法、主要構造部の防火の措置その他の事項について防火上必要な政令で定める技術的基準に適合するもの
(b) buildings, which conform to technical criteria necessary for fire safety established by Cabinet Order concerning construction methods, fire safety measures for principal building parts and other items.
三　畜舎その他の政令で定める用途に供する建築物で、その周辺地域が農業上の利用に供され、又はこれと同様の状況にあつて、その構造及び用途並びに周囲の状況に関し避難上及び延焼防止上支障がないものとして国土交通大臣が定める基準に適合するもの
(iii) livestock sheds or other buildings for use specified by Cabinet Order, of which surrounding areas are used for agriculture or are in a similar condition thereto, and which conform to the criteria specified by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism as there is no objection from the viewpoint of evacuation and prevention of the spread of fire, judging from their construction, use, and surrounding conditions.
（耐火建築物等としなければならない特殊建築物）
(Special Buildings that must be Fire-resistive Buildings)
第二十七条　次の各号のいずれかに該当する特殊建築物は、その主要構造部を当該特殊建築物に存する者の全てが当該特殊建築物から地上までの避難を終了するまでの間通常の火災による建築物の倒壊及び延焼を防止するために主要構造部に必要とされる性能に関して政令で定める技術的基準に適合するもので、国土交通大臣が定めた構造方法を用いるもの又は国土交通大臣の認定を受けたものとし、かつ、その外壁の開口部であつて建築物の他の部分から当該開口部へ延焼するおそれがあるものとして政令で定めるものに、防火戸その他の政令で定める防火設備（その構造が遮炎性能に関して政令で定める技術的基準に適合するもので、国土交通大臣が定めた構造方法を用いるもの又は国土交通大臣の認定を受けたものに限る。）を設けなければならない。
Article 27  (1) The principal building parts of special buildings that come under any of the following items must conform to the technical standards specified by Cabinet Order concerning the performance required to prevent the spread of a normal fire leading to the collapse of the building during the period until the evacuation of all persons in the relevant special building to ground level has been completed, and which uses construction methods established by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or which was approved by the Minister, and fire doors or other opening protective assemblies (limited to items that meet the technical standards for flame blocking performance as specified by Cabinet Order and which uses construction methods established by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or which was approved by the Minister) must be installed at openings in exterior walls designated in Cabinet Order as being at risk of the spread of fire from other parts of the building.
一　別表第一（ろ）欄に掲げる階を同表（い）欄（一）項から（四）項までに掲げる用途に供するもの（階数が三で延べ面積が二百平方メートル未満のもの（同表（ろ）欄に掲げる階を同表（い）欄（二）項に掲げる用途で政令で定めるものに供するものにあつては、政令で定める技術的基準に従つて警報設備を設けたものに限る。）を除く。）
(i) buildings of which floors set forth in column (b) of Appended Table 1 are offered for use set forth in column (a), rows (1) through (4) of the that Table (excluding those with three stories that have a total floor area of less than 200 square meters (limited to those provided with alar equipment in accordance with the technical criteria established by Cabinet Order if the stories set forth in column (b) of that Table are intended for use set forth in column (a), row (2) of that Table that is specified by Cabinet Order));
二　別表第一（い）欄（一）項から（四）項までに掲げる用途に供するもので、その用途に供する部分（同表（一）項の場合にあつては客席、同表（二）項及び（四）項の場合にあつては二階の部分に限り、かつ、病院及び診療所についてはその部分に患者の収容施設がある場合に限る。）の床面積の合計が同表（は）欄の当該各項に該当するもの
(ii) parts (limited to visitor seating in the case of row (1) of Appended Table 1, areas on the second floor in the case of rows (2) and (4) of that table, and accommodation facilities for patients in the case of a hospital or clinic) provided for the uses set forth in column (a), paragraphs (1) through (4) of Appended Table 1 with an aggregate floor area that falls into the categories defined in those rows in column (c) of that table;
三　別表第一（い）欄（四）項に掲げる用途に供するもので、その用途に供する部分の床面積の合計が三千平方メートル以上のもの
(iii) parts provided for the uses set forth in column (a), row (4) of Appended Table 1 that have an aggregate floor area of 3,000 square meters or more.
四　劇場、映画館又は演芸場の用途に供するもので、主階が一階にないもの（階数が三以下で延べ面積が二百平方メートル未満のものを除く。）
(iv) buildings for use as theaters, movie theaters or entertainment halls of which main floors are not situated on the first floor. (Limited to those with three stories or less that have a total floor area of less than 200 square meters).
２　次の各号のいずれかに該当する特殊建築物は、耐火建築物としなければならない。
(2) Special buildings coming under any of the following items must be a fire-resistive building.
一　別表第一（い）欄（五）項に掲げる用途に供するもので、その用途に供する三階以上の部分の床面積の合計が同表（は）欄（五）項に該当するもの
(i) a building in which the aggregate floor area of parts provided for the uses set forth in column (a), row (5) of Appended Table 1 on the third floor or above falls into the category in column (c), row (5) of that table;
二　別表第一（ろ）欄（六）項に掲げる階を同表（い）欄（六）項に掲げる用途に供するもの
(ii) floors listed in column (b), row (6) of Appended Table 1 that are provided for the uses set forth in column (a), row (6) of that.
３　次の各号のいずれかに該当する特殊建築物は、耐火建築物又は準耐火建築物（別表第一（い）欄（六）項に掲げる用途に供するものにあつては、第二条第九号の三ロに該当する準耐火建築物のうち政令で定めるものを除く。）としなければならない。
(3) Special buildings coming under any of the following items must be fire-resistive or quasi fire-resistive buildings (excluding quasi fire-resistive buildings coming under Article 2, item (ix)-3, (b) and as specified by Cabinet Order in the case of buildings for use set forth in column (a), row (6) of Appended Table 1):
一　別表第一（い）欄（五）項又は（六）項に掲げる用途に供するもので、その用途に供する部分の床面積の合計が同表（に）欄の当該各項に該当するもの
(i) parts provided for the uses set forth in column (a), rows (1) through (4) of Appended Table 1 with an aggregate floor area that falls into the categories defined in those rows in column (d) of that table;
二　別表第二（と）項第四号に規定する危険物（安全上及び防火上支障がないものとして政令で定めるものを除く。以下この号において同じ。）の貯蔵場又は処理場の用途に供するもの（貯蔵又は処理に係る危険物の数量が政令で定める限度を超えないものを除く。）
(ii) buildings for use as storage or treatment facilities of hazardous materials (excluding those specified by Cabinet Order as those that are not detrimental to fire safety; the same in this item) as specified in row (g), item (iv) of Appended Table 2 (excluding cases where the quantity of hazardous materials to be stored or treated does not exceed the limits specified by Cabinet Order).
（居室の採光及び換気）
(Natural Lighting and Ventilation of Habitable Rooms)
第二十八条　住宅、学校、病院、診療所、寄宿舎、下宿その他これらに類する建築物で政令で定めるものの居室（居住のための居室、学校の教室、病院の病室その他これらに類するものとして政令で定めるものに限る。）には、採光のための窓その他の開口部を設け、その採光に有効な部分の面積は、その居室の床面積に対して、住宅にあつては七分の一以上、その他の建築物にあつては五分の一から十分の一までの間において政令で定める割合以上としなければならない。ただし、地階若しくは地下工作物内に設ける居室その他これらに類する居室又は温湿度調整を必要とする作業を行う作業室その他用途上やむを得ない居室については、この限りでない。
Article 28  (1) Habitable rooms of houses, schools, hospitals, clinics, dormitories, boarding houses, or other buildings similar thereto as specified by Cabinet Order (limited to those for residential use, classrooms of schools, wards of hospitals, and other rooms similar thereto as specified by Cabinet Order) must have openings such as windows for natural lighting, and the ratio of the area effective for natural lighting to the floor area of those habitable rooms must not be less than 1/7 in the case of houses, and not less than a ratio between 1/5 and 1/10 to be specified by Cabinet Order in the case of other buildings. Provided, however, that this shall not apply to habitable rooms located in basements or underground structures or other habitable rooms similar thereto, or work rooms requiring the adjustment of temperature and humidity or habitable rooms under inevitable circumstances due to their use.
２　居室には換気のための窓その他の開口部を設け、その換気に有効な部分の面積は、その居室の床面積に対して、二十分の一以上としなければならない。ただし、政令で定める技術的基準に従つて換気設備を設けた場合においては、この限りでない。
(2) Habitable rooms must have openings such as windows for ventilation, and the ratio of the area of the part effective for ventilation to the floor area of those habitable rooms must be not less than 1/20. Provided, however, that this shall not apply if ventilation system is provided in compliance with the technical criteria established by Cabinet Order.
３　別表第一（い）欄（一）項に掲げる用途に供する特殊建築物の居室又は建築物の調理室、浴室その他の室でかまど、こんろその他火を使用する設備若しくは器具を設けたもの（政令で定めるものを除く。）には、政令で定める技術的基準に従つて、換気設備を設けなければならない。
(3) Habitable rooms of special buildings for use set forth in column (a), row (1) of Appended Table 1 or those cooking rooms, bathrooms or other rooms of buildings which are equipped with kitchen ranges, cooking stoves or other equipment or apparatus using flame (excluding those specified by Cabinet Order) must have ventilation system in compliance with the technical criteria established by Cabinet Order.
４　ふすま、障子その他随時開放することができるもので仕切られた二室は、前三項の規定の適用については、一室とみなす。
(4) Two habitable rooms partitioned by fusuma, shoji or other fittings that can be freely opened shall be considered to be one room in applying the provisions referred to in the preceding three paragraphs.
（石綿その他の物質の飛散又は発散に対する衛生上の措置）
(Measures to Protect Human Health from the Scattering or Emission of Asbestos and other Substances)
第二十八条の二　建築物は、石綿その他の物質の建築材料からの飛散又は発散による衛生上の支障がないよう、次に掲げる基準に適合するものとしなければならない。
Article 28-2  A building must conform to the following criteria in order to prevent damage to human health by the scattering or emissions of buildings materials made of asbestos and other substances.
一　建築材料に石綿その他の著しく衛生上有害なものとして政令で定める物質（次号及び第三号において「石綿等」という。）を添加しないこと。
(i) not adding asbestos and other substances specified by Cabinet Order as conspicuously harmful to health (referred to as "asbestos etc." in the following item and in item (iii)) to building materials;
二　石綿等をあらかじめ添加した建築材料（石綿等を飛散又は発散させるおそれがないものとして国土交通大臣が定めたもの又は国土交通大臣の認定を受けたものを除く。）を使用しないこと。
(ii) Not using building materials to which asbestos etc. has already been added (excluding those specified by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or those approved by the Minister as those that may not cause the scattering or emission of asbestos etc.);
三　居室を有する建築物にあつては、前二号に定めるもののほか、石綿等以外の物質でその居室内において衛生上の支障を生ずるおそれがあるものとして政令で定める物質の区分に応じ、建築材料及び換気設備について政令で定める技術的基準に適合すること。
(iii) in a building with habitable rooms, in addition to the provisions provided for by the preceding two items, complying with technical criteria established by Cabinet Order for building materials and ventilation system according to a categorization of substances other than asbestos etc., and that are specified by Cabinet Order as those that may cause harm to human health in habitable rooms.
（地階における住宅等の居室）
(Habitable Rooms in Basements of Houses)
第二十九条　住宅の居室、学校の教室、病院の病室又は寄宿舎の寝室で地階に設けるものは、壁及び床の防湿の措置その他の事項について衛生上必要な政令で定める技術的基準に適合するものとしなければならない。
Article 29  Habitable rooms of houses, classrooms of schools, wards of hospitals, or bedrooms of dormitories provided in basements must conform to technical criteria established by Cabinet Order necessary for sanitation concerning damp-proofing measures for walls or floors and other items.
（長屋又は共同住宅の各戸の界壁）
(Unit Separation Walls in Row Houses and Apartment Houses)
第三十条　長屋又は共同住宅の各戸の界壁は、次に掲げる基準に適合するものとしなければならない。
Article 30  (1) Unit separation walls in row houses and apartment houses must conform to the following criteria.
一　その構造が、隣接する住戸からの日常生活に伴い生ずる音を衛生上支障がないように低減するために界壁に必要とされる性能に関して政令で定める技術的基準に適合するもので、国土交通大臣が定めた構造方法を用いるもの又は国土交通大臣の認定を受けたものであること。
(i) the construction of the separation wall shall conform to the technical criteria established by Cabinet Order concerning the performance of the separation wall required to reduce the sound generated by daily activities from adjoining units so that the sound will not affect anyone's health, and which uses the construction methods established by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or which was approved by the Minister;
二　小屋裏又は天井裏に達するものであること。
(ii) the separation wall shall extend into attic space or ceiling space.
２　前項第二号の規定は、長屋又は共同住宅の天井の構造が、隣接する住戸からの日常生活に伴い生ずる音を衛生上支障がないように低減するために天井に必要とされる性能に関して政令で定める技術的基準に適合するもので、国土交通大臣が定めた構造方法を用いるもの又は国土交通大臣の認定を受けたものである場合においては、適用しない。
(2) The provisions of item (ii) of the preceding paragraph shall not apply to if the construction of the ceilings of row houses or apartment houses conforms to the technical criteria established by Cabinet Order concerning the performance that is required of ceilings to reduce the sound generated by daily activities from adjoining units so that the sound will not affect the health of residents, and which uses the construction methods established by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or which was approved by the Minister.
（便所）
(Lavatories)
第三十一条　下水道法（昭和三十三年法律第七十九号）第二条第八号に規定する処理区域内においては、便所は、水洗便所（汚水管が下水道法第二条第三号に規定する公共下水道に連結されたものに限る。）以外の便所としてはならない。
Article 31  (1) Lavatories must not have toilets other than those of flush type (limited to those in which the soil pipes are connected to public sewerage as specified in Article 2, item (iii) of the Sewerage Act) in areas as specified in Article 2, item (viii) of the Sewerage Act (Act No. 79 of 1958).
２　便所から排出する汚物を下水道法第二条第六号に規定する終末処理場を有する公共下水道以外に放流しようとする場合においては、屎（し）尿浄化槽（その構造が汚物処理性能（当該汚物を衛生上支障がないように処理するために屎（し）尿浄化槽に必要とされる性能をいう。）に関して政令で定める技術的基準に適合するもので、国土交通大臣が定めた構造方法を用いるもの又は国土交通大臣の認定を受けたものに限る。）を設けなければならない。
(2) If the sewerage of lavatories is to be drained into a place other than the public sewerage having a terminal treatment plant as specified in Article 2, item (vi) of the Sewerage Act, wastewater purifiers (limited to those of a construction which conforms to technical criteria established by Cabinet Order concerning wastewater treatment performance (performance of wastewater purifiers necessary to treat wastewater without adversely affecting sanitation) and which uses construction methods established by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or which was approved by the Minister) must be provided.
（電気設備）
(Electrical Equipment)
第三十二条　建築物の電気設備は、法律又はこれに基く命令の規定で電気工作物に係る建築物の安全及び防火に関するものの定める工法によつて設けなければならない。
Article 32  Electrical equipment in buildings must be installed by a method as specified in those provisions of laws or orders based thereon which pertain to the safety and fire prevention of buildings concerning electrical structures.
（避雷設備）
(Lightning Conductors)
第三十三条　高さ二十メートルをこえる建築物には、有効に避雷設備を設けなければならない。ただし、周囲の状況によつて安全上支障がない場合においては、この限りでない。
Article 33  Buildings exceeding 20 meters in height must have lightning conductors in an effective manner. Provided, however, that this shall not apply if there is no objection from the viewpoint of safety, due to surrounding conditions.
（昇降機）
(Elevatory system)
第三十四条　建築物に設ける昇降機は、安全な構造で、かつ、その昇降路の周壁及び開口部は、防火上支障がない構造でなければならない。
Article 34  (1) Elevatory system to be installed in buildings must be of safe construction, and surrounding walls and openings of hoistway must be of construction appropriate for fire prevention.
２　高さ三十一メートルをこえる建築物（政令で定めるものを除く。）には、非常用の昇降機を設けなければならない。
(2) Buildings (excluding those specified by Cabinet Order) exceeding 31 meters in height must be provided with elevatory system for emergency use.
（特殊建築物等の避難及び消火に関する技術的基準）
(Technical Criteria for Evacuation and Extinguishing of Fire in Special Buildings)
第三十五条　別表第一（い）欄（一）項から（四）項までに掲げる用途に供する特殊建築物、階数が三以上である建築物、政令で定める窓その他の開口部を有しない居室を有する建築物又は延べ面積（同一敷地内に二以上の建築物がある場合においては、その延べ面積の合計）が千平方メートルをこえる建築物については、廊下、階段、出入口その他の避難施設、消火栓（せん）、スプリンクラー、貯水槽（そう）その他の消火設備、排煙設備、非常用の照明装置及び進入口並びに敷地内の避難上及び消火上必要な通路は、政令で定める技術的基準に従つて、避難上及び消火上支障がないようにしなければならない。
Article 35  With respect to special buildings offered for use set forth in column (a), rows (1) through (4) of Appended Table 1, buildings having three or more stories, buildings having habitable rooms with no openings such as windows as specified by Cabinet Order, or buildings of which total floor area (or the aggregate of total floor areas if there are two or more buildings on the same site) exceeds 1,000 square meters, corridors, stairways, doorways or other evacuation facilities, fire hydrants, sprinklers, water tanks or other fire extinguishing equipment, smoke exhaust equipment, emergency lighting system and entrances for emergency use, and passageways within the site for evacuation and fire fighting must be provided in a manner so as not to obstruct evacuation and fire fighting, in compliance with the technical criteria established by Cabinet Order.
（特殊建築物等の内装）
(Interior Finish of Special Buildings)
第三十五条の二　別表第一（い）欄に掲げる用途に供する特殊建築物、階数が三以上である建築物、政令で定める窓その他の開口部を有しない居室を有する建築物、延べ面積が千平方メートルをこえる建築物又は建築物の調理室、浴室その他の室でかまど、こんろその他火を使用する設備若しくは器具を設けたものは、政令で定めるものを除き、政令で定める技術的基準に従つて、その壁及び天井（天井のない場合においては、屋根）の室内に面する部分の仕上げを防火上支障がないようにしなければならない。
Article 35-2  All special buildings for use set forth in column (a) of Appended Table 1, buildings having three or more stories, buildings having habitable rooms with no openings such as windows as specified by Cabinet Order, buildings of which total floor area exceeds 1,000 square meters, or buildings of which rooms such as cooking rooms and bathrooms are equipped with kitchen ranges, cooking stoves or other equipment or apparatus using flame must have the interior surface of their walls and ceilings (their roofs if there is no ceiling) finished in a manner appropriate for fire safety, in compliance with the technical criteria established by Cabinet Order, excluding those as specified by Cabinet Order.
（無窓の居室等の主要構造部）
(Principal Building Parts of Habitable Rooms without Windows)
第三十五条の三　政令で定める窓その他の開口部を有しない居室は、その居室を区画する主要構造部を耐火構造とし、又は不燃材料で造らなければならない。ただし、別表第一（い）欄（一）項に掲げる用途に供するものについては、この限りでない。
Article 35-3  Principal building parts which partition a habitable room with no openings such as windows as specified by Cabinet Order must be of fire-resistive construction or be made of noncombustible materials. Provided, however, that this shall not apply to habitable rooms for use set forth in column (a), row (1) of Appended Table 1.
（この章の規定を実施し、又は補足するため必要な技術的基準）
(Technical Criteria Necessary to Enforce or Supplement Provisions of This Chapter)
第三十六条　居室の採光面積、天井及び床の高さ、床の防湿方法、階段の構造、便所、防火壁、防火床、防火区画、消火設備、避雷設備及び給水、排水その他の配管設備の設置及び構造並びに浄化槽、煙突及び昇降機の構造に関して、この章の規定を実施し、又は補足するために安全上、防火上及び衛生上必要な技術的基準は、政令で定める。
Article 36  With respect to the natural lighting area of habitable rooms, height of ceilings and floors, damp-proofing methods for floors, construction of stairways, installation and construction of lavatories, fire walls, fire floors, fire compartments, fire extinguishing equipment, lightning conductor and plumbing equipment supplying water and drainage, and the construction of wastewater purifiers, chimneys and elevatory system of buildings, technical criteria necessary for safety, fire prevention and sanitation in order to enforce or supplement the provisions of this Chapter shall be established by Cabinet Order.
（建築材料の品質）
(Quality of Building Materials)
第三十七条　建築物の基礎、主要構造部その他安全上、防火上又は衛生上重要である政令で定める部分に使用する木材、鋼材、コンクリートその他の建築材料として国土交通大臣が定めるもの（以下この条において「指定建築材料」という。）は、次の各号のいずれかに該当するものでなければならない。
Article 37  Those building materials as wood, steel, concrete, and other materials specified by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism used for the foundations, principal building parts, and other parts of buildings specified by Cabinet Order which are important from the viewpoint of safety, fire prevention, and sanitation (hereinafter in this Article referred to as "designated building materials") must come under any of the following items:
一　その品質が、指定建築材料ごとに国土交通大臣の指定する日本産業規格又は日本農林規格に適合するもの
(i) those qualities conform to the Japanese Industrial Standards or the Japanese Agricultural Standards designated for each designated building material by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism;
二　前号ｓｅｔｆｏｒｔｈもののほか、指定建築材料ごとに国土交通大臣が定める安全上、防火上又は衛生上必要な品質に関する技術的基準に適合するものであることについて国土交通大臣の認定を受けたもの
(ii) in addition to building materials set forth the preceding item, those approved by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism as conforming to technical criteria for each designated building material specified by the Minister concerning the quality necessary for safety, fire prevention, and sanitation.
（特殊の構造方法又は建築材料）
(Special Structural Methods or Building Materials)
第三十八条　この章の規定及びこれに基づく命令の規定は、その予想しない特殊の構造方法又は建築材料を用いる建築物については、国土交通大臣がその構造方法又は建築材料がこれらの規定に適合するものと同等以上の効力があると認める場合においては、適用しない。
Article 38  The provisions of this Chapter and orders based on those provisions shall not apply to buildings in which special structural methods or building materials not anticipated herein are used, provided that the relevant structural methods or building materials have been approved by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism as having efficacy that is equivalent or superior to items that conform to these provisions.
（災害危険区域）
(Disaster Risk Area)
第三十九条　地方公共団体は、条例で、津波、高潮、出水等による危険の著しい区域を災害危険区域として指定することができる。
Article 39  (1) A local government may designate areas with a frequent danger of tidal waves, high tide, flood, etc. as Disaster Risk Areas by ordinances.
２　災害危険区域内における住居の用に供する建築物の建築の禁止その他建築物の建築に関する制限で災害防止上必要なものは、前項の条例で定める。
(2) With respect to Disaster Risk Areas, the prohibition of construction of buildings for use as houses and other restrictions relating to the construction of buildings, which are necessary for disaster prevention, shall be specified by ordinances as mentioned in the preceding paragraph.
（地方公共団体の条例による制限の附加）
(Addition of Restrictions by Ordinances of Local Government)
第四十条　地方公共団体は、その地方の気候若しくは風土の特殊性又は特殊建築物の用途若しくは規模に因り、この章の規定又はこれに基く命令の規定のみによつては建築物の安全、防火又は衛生の目的を充分に達し難いと認める場合においては、条例で、建築物の敷地、構造又は建築設備に関して安全上、防火上又は衛生上必要な制限を附加することができる。
Article 40  If a local government concludes that the provisions of this Chapter or those of orders based thereon do not suffice for ensuring safety, fire prevention or sanitation of buildings due to the characteristics of climate or natural features of the region or the use or scale of special buildings, it may prescribe, by ordinances, additional restrictions necessary for safety, fire prevention or sanitation concerning the site, construction or building equipment of buildings.
（市町村の条例による制限の緩和）
(Relaxation of Restrictions by Ordinance of Municipality)
第四十一条　第六条第一項第四号の区域外においては、市町村は、土地の状況により必要と認める場合においては、国土交通大臣の承認を得て、条例で、区域を限り、第十九条、第二十一条、第二十八条、第二十九条及び第三十六条の規定の全部若しくは一部を適用せず、又はこれらの規定による制限を緩和することができる。ただし、第六条第一項第一号及び第三号の建築物については、この限りでない。
Article 41  For locations outside the areas specified in Article 6, paragraph (1), item (iv), any municipality may not apply, in whole or in part, provisions referred to in Article 19, Article 21, Article 28, Article 29 and Article 36 or may relax the restrictions under these provisions within areas specified by ordinances, when it has been concluded that that non-application or relaxation of the restrictions is necessary due to the land conditions, upon obtaining the approval of the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism. Provided, however, that this shall not apply to buildings as mentioned in Article 6, paragraph (1), items (i) and (iii).
第三章　都市計画区域等における建築物の敷地、構造、建築設備及び用途
Chapter III Site, Construction, Building Equipment and Use of Buildings within City Planning Areas, etc.
第一節　総則
Section 1 General Provisions
（適用区域）
(Applicable Areas)
第四十一条の二　この章（第八節を除く。）の規定は、都市計画区域及び準都市計画区域内に限り、適用する。
Article 41-2  The provisions of this Chapter (excluding Section 8) shall apply only to City Planning Areas and Quasi-city Planning Area.
（道路の定義）
(Definition of Roads)
第四十二条　この章の規定において「道路」とは、次の各号のいずれかに該当する幅員四メートル（特定行政庁がその地方の気候若しくは風土の特殊性又は土地の状況により必要と認めて都道府県都市計画審議会の議を経て指定する区域内においては、六メートル。次項及び第三項において同じ。）以上のもの（地下におけるものを除く。）をいう。
Article 42  (1) "Roads" in the provisions of this Chapter shall mean those which are not less than 4 meters in width (not less than 6 meters in areas where the Designated Administrative Agency concludes that it is necessary because of local climatic conditions, special characteristics of the natural features of the region, or land conditions, and designates as such after deliberations by the Prefectural City Planning Council; the same in the next paragraph and paragraph (3)), and which come under any of the following items (excluding underground):
一　道路法（昭和二十七年法律第百八十号）による道路
(i) roads under the Road Act (Act No. 180 of 1952);
二　都市計画法、土地区画整理法（昭和二十九年法律第百十九号）、旧住宅地造成事業に関する法律（昭和三十九年法律第百六十号）、都市再開発法（昭和四十四年法律第三十八号）、新都市基盤整備法（昭和四十七年法律第八十六号）、大都市地域における住宅及び住宅地の供給の促進に関する特別措置法（昭和五十年法律第六十七号）又は密集市街地整備法（第六章に限る。以下この項において同じ。）による道路
(ii) roads under the City Planning Act, the Land Readjustment Act (Act No. 119 of 1954), the Old Act on Residential Land Development Project (Act No. 160 of 1964), the Urban Renewal Act (Act No. 38 of 1969), the Act on Development of the Infrastructures for New Cities (Act No. 86 of 1972), the Act on Special Measures concerning Promotion of Supply of Houses and Housing Lands in Urban Districts (Act No. 67 of 1975), or the Concentrated Urban Areas Development Act (limited to Chapter VI: same shall apply below in this paragraph);
三　都市計画区域若しくは準都市計画区域の指定若しくは変更又は第六十八条の九第一項の規定に基づく条例の制定若しくは改正によりこの章の規定が適用されるに至つた際現に存在する道
(iii) roadways actually exist at the time of the application of the provisions of this Chapter by designation or change of the City Planning Areas or Quasi-city Planning Areas, or enactment or amendment of an ordinance under the provision of Article 68-9, paragraph 1;
四　道路法、都市計画法、土地区画整理法、都市再開発法、新都市基盤整備法、大都市地域における住宅及び住宅地の供給の促進に関する特別措置法又は密集市街地整備法による新設又は変更の事業計画のある道路で、二年以内にその事業が執行される予定のものとして特定行政庁が指定したもの
(iv) roads planned for new construction or alteration under the Road Act, the City Planning Act, the Land Readjustment Act, the Urban Renewal Act, the Act on Development of the Infrastructures for New Cities, the Act on Special Measures concerning Promotion of Supply of Houses and Housing Lands in Urban Districts, or the Concentrated Urban Areas Development Act, which are designated by the Designated Administrative Agency anticipating that the plan will be executed within two years;
五　土地を建築物の敷地として利用するため、道路法、都市計画法、土地区画整理法、都市再開発法、新都市基盤整備法、大都市地域における住宅及び住宅地の供給の促進に関する特別措置法又は密集市街地整備法によらないで築造する政令で定める基準に適合する道で、これを築造しようとする者が特定行政庁からその位置の指定を受けたもの
(v) roadways in compliance with the standards specified by Cabinet Order which are to be constructed, not under the Road Act, the City Planning Act, the Land Readjustment Act, the Urban Renewal Act, the Act on Development of the Infrastructures for New Cities, the Special Measures Act on Special Measures concerning Promotion of Supply of Houses and Housing Lands in Urban Districts, or the Concentrated Urban Areas Development Act, in order to utilize land as the site of buildings, and for which the Designated Administrative Agency has designated the location thereof to the person intending to construct them.
２　都市計画区域若しくは準都市計画区域の指定若しくは変更又は第六十八条の九第一項の規定に基づく条例の制定若しくは改正によりこの章の規定が適用されるに至つた際現に建築物が立ち並んでいる幅員四メートル未満の道で、特定行政庁の指定したものは、前項の規定にかかわらず、同項の道路とみなし、その中心線からの水平距離二メートル（同項の規定により指定された区域内においては、三メートル（特定行政庁が周囲の状況により避難及び通行の安全上支障がないと認める場合は、二メートル）。以下この項及び次項において同じ。）の線をその道路の境界線とみなす。ただし、当該道がその中心線からの水平距離二メートル未満で崖地、川、線路敷地その他これらに類するものに沿う場合においては、当該崖地等の道の側の境界線及びその境界線から道の側に水平距離四メートルの線をその道路の境界線とみなす。
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph, any roadway less than 4 meters in width actually lined with buildings at the time of applying the provisions of this Chapter by designation or change of the City Planning Areas or Quasi-city Planning Areas, or enactment or amendment of an ordinance under the provision of Article 68-9, paragraph 1, and which is designated by the Designated Administrative Agency shall be regarded as a road as specified in that paragraph, and lines two meters (three meters in areas designated pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph (two meters when the Designated Administrative Agency concludes that there is no objection from the viewpoint of the safe evacuation and the passage of traffic due to surrounding conditions); the same in this paragraph and the next paragraph) in horizontal distance from either side of the center line thereof shall be regarded as the boundary lines of that road. Provided, however, that if the relevant roadway is along a cliff, stream, railway site or the like within 2 meters in horizontal distance from the center line thereof, the boundary line of the side of the roadway abutting on the relevant cliff, etc. and a line 4 meters in horizontal distance on the opposite side of the roadway from that boundary line shall be regarded as the boundary lines of the road.
３　特定行政庁は、土地の状況に因りやむを得ない場合においては、前項の規定にかかわらず、同項に規定する中心線からの水平距離については二メートル未満一・三五メートル以上の範囲内において、同項に規定するがけ地等の境界線からの水平距離については四メートル未満二・七メートル以上の範囲内において、別にその水平距離を指定することができる。
(3) In inevitable cases due to land conditions, the Designated Administrative Agency may designate separately the horizontal distance within the limits of less than 2 meters but not less than 1.35 meters as for the horizontal distance from that center line as specified in that paragraph and within the limits of less than 4 meters but not less than 2.7 meters as for the horizontal distance from the boundary line of that cliff, etc. as specified in that paragraph notwithstanding the provision of the preceding paragraph.
４　第一項の区域内の幅員六メートル未満の道（第一号又は第二号に該当する道にあつては、幅員四メートル以上のものに限る。）で、特定行政庁が次の各号の一に該当すると認めて指定したものは、同項の規定にかかわらず、同項の道路とみなす。
(4) Roadways of less than 6 meters in width in the areas under paragraph (1) (in the case of roadways coming under item (i) or (ii), limited to those of which width is of 4 meters or more), which the Designated Administrative Agency determines should come under any of the following items and designates as such shall, notwithstanding the provisions in that paragraph, be regarded as roads as they are defined in that paragraph:
一　周囲の状況により避難及び通行の安全上支障がないと認められる道
(i) roadways for which it is concluded that there is no objection from the viewpoint of safe evacuation and the passage of traffic due to surrounding conditions;
二　地区計画等に定められた道の配置及び規模又はその区域に即して築造される道
(ii) roadways, which are constructed in compliance with District Planning, etc. with regard to their location and size;
三　第一項の区域が指定された際現に道路とされていた道
(iii) roadways, which were already considered as roads at the time of the designation of areas in paragraph (1).
５　前項第三号に該当すると認めて特定行政庁が指定した幅員四メートル未満の道については、第二項の規定にかかわらず、第一項の区域が指定された際道路の境界線とみなされていた線をその道路の境界線とみなす。
(5) With respect to roadways less than 4 meters in width which the Designated Administrative Agency determines should come under item (iii) of the preceding paragraph and designates as such, notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (2), the line regarded as the boundary line of the roads at the time of the designation of areas in paragraph (1) shall be the boundary line of the roads.
６　特定行政庁は、第二項の規定により幅員一・八メートル未満の道を指定する場合又は第三項の規定により別に水平距離を指定する場合においては、あらかじめ、建築審査会の同意を得なければならない。
(6) If the Designated Administrative Agency intends to designate roadways less than 1.8 meters in width under paragraph (2), or where it intends to designate separately the horizontal distance under paragraph (3), it must obtain the prior consent of the Building Review Council.
第二節　建築物又はその敷地と道路又は壁面線との関係等
Section 2 Relations between Buildings or Their Sites and Roads or Wall Alignment
（敷地等と道路との関係）
(Relations between Sites and Roads)
第四十三条　建築物の敷地は、道路（次に掲げるものを除く。第四十四条第一項を除き、以下同じ。）に二メートル以上接しなければならない。
Article 43  (1) Every building site must be a distance of 2 meters or more from the road on which the property abuts (excluding roads set forth in the following; the same applies hereinafter excluding Article 44, paragraph (1)):
一　自動車のみの交通の用に供する道路
(i) roads exclusively used for automobile traffic;
二　地区計画の区域（地区整備計画が定められている区域のうち都市計画法第十二条の十一の規定により建築物その他の工作物の敷地として併せて利用すべき区域として定められている区域に限る。）内の道路
(ii) roads within areas of District Plans (limited to the areas within those for which District Development Plans are devised, and that are designated as areas to be used jointly as sites for buildings and other structures pursuant to the provisions of Article 12-11 of the City Planning Act).
２　前項の規定は、次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物については、適用しない。
(2) The provisions in the preceding paragraph shall not apply to buildings that come under any of the following items:
一　その敷地が幅員四メートル以上の道（道路に該当するものを除き、避難及び通行の安全上必要な国土交通省令で定める基準に適合するものに限る。）に二メートル以上接する建築物のうち、利用者が少数であるものとしてその用途及び規模に関し国土交通省令で定める基準に適合するもので、特定行政庁が交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めるもの
(i) buildings of which the site abuts on a road of at least 4 meters in width (excluding those under the category of a road, and limited to sites conforming to criteria specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order that are required for the safety of evacuation and passage) and that are 2 meters or more from the road, and that conform to criteria specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order concerning those use and scale as having a small number of users and for which it is concluded by the Designated Administrative Agency that there is no objection from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire prevention or sanitation;
二　その敷地の周囲に広い空地を有する建築物その他の国土交通省令で定める基準に適合する建築物で、特定行政庁が交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めて建築審査会の同意を得て許可したもの
(ii) buildings conforming to criteria specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order such as those with a large open space around their sites, and for which it is concluded by the Designated Administrative Agency that there is no objection from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire prevention or sanitation, and to which permission is given by the Designated Administrative Agency after obtaining consent from the Building Review Council.
３　地方公共団体は、次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物について、その用途、規模又は位置の特殊性により、第一項の規定によつては避難又は通行の安全の目的を十分に達成することが困難であると認めるときは、条例で、その敷地が接しなければならない道路の幅員、その敷地が道路に接する部分の長さその他その敷地又は建築物と道路との関係に関して必要な制限を付加することができる。
(3) If a local government finds it difficult to sufficiently insure safe evacuation or passage depending on the provision of paragraph (1) concerning a building under any of the following items, due to the circumstances of their use, scale or position, the organization may add necessary restrictions by specifying an ordinance concerning the width of the road on which the site must abut, the length of the parts of the site abutting on the road, or other relationship between the site or building and the road.
一　特殊建築物
(i) special buildings;
二　階数が三以上である建築物
(ii) buildings with 3 or more stories;
三　政令で定める窓その他の開口部を有しない居室を有する建築物
(iii) buildings with habitable rooms that have no openings, such as windows that come under Cabinet Order;
四　延べ面積（同一敷地内に二以上の建築物がある場合にあつては、その延べ面積の合計。次号、第四節、第七節及び別表第三において同じ。）が千平方メートルを超える建築物
(iv) buildings exceeding 1,000 square meters in total floor area (or the aggregate of total floor areas if there are two or more buildings on the same site; the same shall apply in the next item, Section 4, Section 7 and Appended Table 3);
五　その敷地が袋路状道路（その一端のみが他の道路に接続したものをいう。）にのみ接する建築物で、延べ面積が百五十平方メートルを超えるもの（一戸建ての住宅を除く。）
(v) buildings on site touching a cul-de-sac (A road that is connected to another road only at one end.) and exceeding 150 square meters in total floor area (excluding single-family houses).
（その敷地が四メートル未満の道路にのみ接する建築物に対する制限の付加）
(Additional Restrictions on Buildings on Site touching a Road Less than Four Meters in Width)
第四十三条の二　地方公共団体は、交通上、安全上、防火上又は衛生上必要があると認めるときは、その敷地が第四十二条第三項の規定により水平距離が指定された道路にのみ二メートル（前条第三項各号のいずれかに該当する建築物で同項の条例によりその敷地が道路に接する部分の長さの制限が付加されているものにあつては、当該長さ）以上接する建築物について、条例で、その敷地、構造、建築設備又は用途に関して必要な制限を付加することができる。
Article 43-2  If a local government finds it necessary for traffic, safety, fire prevention, or sanitation purpose, by an ordinance, it may add additional necessary restrictions to the site, the construction, the building equipment or the use of a building for the building of which site abuts a road with horizontal distance designated pursuant to the provisions of Article 42, paragraph (3) by two meters or more (in a case where a building coming under any of the items of paragraph (3) of the preceding Article is subject to an additional restriction on the length of parts of its site in contact with a road under the provisions of the regulations in that paragraph; the relevant length).
（道路内の建築制限）
(Building Restrictions on Roads)
第四十四条　建築物又は敷地を造成するための擁壁は、道路内に、又は道路に突き出して建築し、又は築造してはならない。ただし、次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物については、この限りでない。
Article 44  (1) Buildings or retaining walls to form the sites thereof must not be built or constructed upon or projecting onto roads. Provided, however, that this shall not apply to buildings which come under any of the following items:
一　地盤面下に設ける建築物
(i) buildings to be constructed below ground level;
二　公衆便所、巡査派出所その他これらに類する公益上必要な建築物で特定行政庁が通行上支障がないと認めて建築審査会の同意を得て許可したもの
(ii) public lavatories, police boxes, or other similar buildings necessary for the public interest and permitted by the Designated Administrative Agency with the consent of the Building Review Council that do not impede traffic;
三　第四十三条第一項第二号の道路の上空又は路面下に設ける建築物のうち、当該道路に係る地区計画の内容に適合し、かつ、政令で定める基準に適合するものであつて特定行政庁が安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めるもの
(iii) buildings to be constructed over or under the surface of the roads specified in Article 43, paragraph (1), item (ii), that conform to the provisions of the District Plans concerning the relevant roads and that conform to the criteria established by Cabinet Order, and for which it is concluded by the Designated Administrative Agency that there is no objection from the viewpoint of safety, fire prevention or sanitation;
四　公共用歩廊その他政令で定める建築物で特定行政庁が安全上、防火上及び衛生上他の建築物の利便を妨げ、その他周囲の環境を害するおそれがないと認めて許可したもの
(iv) public promenades and other buildings specified by Cabinet Order, which the Designated Administrative Agency has permitted after concluding that those buildings are unlikely to disturb the safety, fire prevention or sanitation of other buildings or harm the surrounding environment.
２　特定行政庁は、前項第四号の規定による許可をする場合においては、あらかじめ、建築審査会の同意を得なければならない。
(2) When the Designated Administrative Agency grants permission under item (iv) of the preceding paragraph, it must obtain the prior consent of the Building Review Council.
（私道の変更又は廃止の制限）
(Restrictions on Alteration or Abolition of Private Roads)
第四十五条　私道の変更又は廃止によつて、その道路に接する敷地が第四十三条第一項の規定又は同条第三項の規定に基づく条例の規定に抵触することとなる場合においては、特定行政庁は、その私道の変更又は廃止を禁止し、又は制限することができる。
Article 45  (1) If sites adjacent to roads come to be unconformable to the provision of Article 43, paragraph (1) or those of ordinances based on the provision of paragraph (3) of that Article due to the alteration or abolition of private roads, the Designated Administrative Agency may prohibit or restrict the alteration or abolition of those private roads.
２　第九条第二項から第六項まで及び第十五項の規定は、前項の措置を命ずる場合に準用する。
(2) The provisions of Article 9, paragraphs (2) through (6) and paragraph (15) shall apply mutatis mutandis to cases where orders are issued for the implementation of measures under the preceding paragraph.
（壁面線の指定）
(Designation of Wall Alignment)
第四十六条　特定行政庁は、街区内における建築物の位置を整えその環境の向上を図るために必要があると認める場合においては、建築審査会の同意を得て、壁面線を指定することができる。この場合においては、あらかじめ、その指定に利害関係を有する者の出頭を求めて公開による意見の聴取を行わなければならない。
Article 46  (1) If the Designated Administrative Agency deems it necessary for the purpose of improving the local environment by arranging the location of buildings within blocks, it may designate wall alignment upon obtaining the consent of the Building Review Council. In this case, it must hold a public hearing in advance, requesting the presence of persons having interests in that designation.
２　前項の規定による意見の聴取を行う場合においては、同項の規定による指定の計画並びに意見の聴取の期日及び場所を期日の三日前までに公告しなければならない。
(2) When holding a hearing under the preceding paragraph, the Designated Administrative Agency must give public notice of the designation plan concerned, and the hearing date and place under that paragraph not later than three days before that date.
３　特定行政庁は、第一項の規定による指定をした場合においては、遅滞なく、その旨を公告しなければならない。
(3) When the Designated Administrative Agency makes a designation under paragraph (1), it must give public notice to that effect without delay.
（壁面線による建築制限）
(Building Restrictions concerning Wall Alignment)
第四十七条　建築物の壁若しくはこれに代る柱又は高さ二メートルをこえる門若しくはへいは、壁面線を越えて建築してはならない。ただし、地盤面下の部分又は特定行政庁が建築審査会の同意を得て許可した歩廊の柱その他これに類するものについては、この限りでない。
Article 47  Walls of buildings or columns substituted therefor, or gates or fences exceeding 2 meters in height must not be erected beyond wall alignment. Provided, however, that this shall not apply to the parts of buildings below the ground level or to the columns of promenades or the like permitted by the Designated Administrative Agency upon obtaining the consent of the Building Review Council.
第三節　建築物の用途
Section 3 Use of Buildings
（用途地域等）
(Use Districts, etc.)
第四十八条　第一種低層住居専用地域内においては、別表第二（い）項に掲げる建築物以外の建築物は、建築してはならない。ただし、特定行政庁が第一種低層住居専用地域における良好な住居の環境を害するおそれがないと認め、又は公益上やむを得ないと認めて許可した場合においては、この限りでない。
Article 48  (1) Buildings other than those set forth in row (a) of Appended Table 2 must not be built in Category 1 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts. Provided, however, that this shall not apply when the Designated Administrative Agency has granted permission after concluding that there is no likely detriment to the favorable residential environment in Category 1 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, or that it is permissible in light of the public interest.
２　第二種低層住居専用地域内においては、別表第二（ろ）項に掲げる建築物以外の建築物は、建築してはならない。ただし、特定行政庁が第二種低層住居専用地域における良好な住居の環境を害するおそれがないと認め、又は公益上やむを得ないと認めて許可した場合においては、この限りでない。
(2) Buildings other than those buildings set forth in paragraph (b) of Appended Table 2 must not be built in Category 2 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts. Provided, however, that this shall not apply when the Designated Administrative Agency has granted permission after concluding that there is no likely detriment to the favorable residential environment in Category 2 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, or that it is permissible in light of the public interest.
３　第一種中高層住居専用地域内においては、別表第二（は）項に掲げる建築物以外の建築物は、建築してはならない。ただし、特定行政庁が第一種中高層住居専用地域における良好な住居の環境を害するおそれがないと認め、又は公益上やむを得ないと認めて許可した場合においては、この限りでない。
(3) Buildings other than those buildings set forth in row (c) of Appended Table 2 must not be built in Category 1 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts. Provided, however, that this shall not apply when the Designated Administrative Agency has granted permission after concluding that there is no likely detriment to the favorable residential environment in Category 1 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, or that it is permissible in light of the public interest.
４　第二種中高層住居専用地域内においては、別表第二（に）項に掲げる建築物は、建築してはならない。ただし、特定行政庁が第二種中高層住居専用地域における良好な住居の環境を害するおそれがないと認め、又は公益上やむを得ないと認めて許可した場合においては、この限りでない。
(4) Buildings set forth in row (d) of Appended Table 2 shall not be built in Category 2 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts. Provided, however, that this must not apply when the Designated Administrative Agency has granted permission after concluding that there is no likely detriment to the favorable residential environment in Category 2 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, or that it is permissible in light of the public interest.
５　第一種住居地域内においては、別表第二（ほ）項に掲げる建築物は、建築してはならない。ただし、特定行政庁が第一種住居地域における住居の環境を害するおそれがないと認め、又は公益上やむを得ないと認めて許可した場合においては、この限りでない。
(5) Buildings set forth in row (e) of Appended Table 2 must not be built in Category 1 Residential Districts. Provided, however, that this shall not apply when the Designated Administrative Agency has granted permission after concluding that there is no likely detriment to the residential environment in Category 1 Residential Districts, or that it is permissible in light of the public interest.
６　第二種住居地域内においては、別表第二（へ）項に掲げる建築物は、建築してはならない。ただし、特定行政庁が第二種住居地域における住居の環境を害するおそれがないと認め、又は公益上やむを得ないと認めて許可した場合においては、この限りでない。
(6) Buildings set forth in row (f) of Appended Table 2 must not be built in Category 2 Residential Districts. Provided, however, that this shall not apply when the Designated Administrative Agency has granted permission after concluding that there is no likely detriment to the residential environment in Category 2 Residential Districts, or that it is permissible in light of the public interest.
７　準住居地域内においては、別表第二（と）項に掲げる建築物は、建築してはならない。ただし、特定行政庁が準住居地域における住居の環境を害するおそれがないと認め、又は公益上やむを得ないと認めて許可した場合においては、この限りでない。
(7) Buildings set forth in row (g) of Appended Table 2 must not be built in Quasi-residential Districts. Provided, however, that this shall not apply when the Designated Administrative Agency has granted permission after concluding that there is no likely detriment to the residential environment in Quasi-residential Districts, or that it is permissible in light of the public interest.
８　田園住居地域内においては、別表第二（ち）項に掲げる建築物以外の建築物は、建築してはならない。ただし、特定行政庁が農業の利便及び田園住居地域における良好な住居の環境を害するおそれがないと認め、又は公益上やむを得ないと認めて許可した場合においては、この限りでない。
(8) Buildings other than the buildings set forth in row (h) of Appended Table 2 must not be built in Countryside Residential Districts. Provided, however, this shall not apply when the Designated Administrative Agency has granted permission after concluding that it is unlikely that the buildings are detrimental to the agriculture land or to the residential environment in Countryside Residential Districts or after concluding that the building is permissible in light of the public interest.
９　近隣商業地域内においては、別表第二（り）項に掲げる建築物は、建築してはならない。ただし、特定行政庁が近隣の住宅地の住民に対する日用品の供給を行うことを主たる内容とする商業その他の業務の利便及び当該住宅地の環境を害するおそれがないと認め、又は公益上やむを得ないと認めて許可した場合においては、この限りでない。
(9) Buildings set forth in row (i) of Appended Table 2 must not be built in Neighborhood Commercial Districts. Provided, however, that this shall not apply when the Designated Administrative Agency has granted permission after concluding that there is no likely detriment to the conducting of commerce and other businesses mainly engaged in supplying daily necessities to the inhabitants of neighborhood residential quarters, nor to the environment of the relevant residential quarters, or that it is permissible in light of the public interest.
１０　商業地域内においては、別表第二（ぬ）項に掲げる建築物は、建築してはならない。ただし、特定行政庁が商業の利便を害するおそれがないと認め、又は公益上やむを得ないと認めて許可した場合においては、この限りでない。
(10) Buildings set forth in row (j) of Appended Table 2 must not be built in Commercial Districts. Provided, however, that this shall not apply when the Designated Administrative Agency has granted permission after concluding that there is no likely detriment to the conducting of commerce, or that it is permissible in light of the public interest.
１１　準工業地域内においては、別表第二（る）項に掲げる建築物は、建築してはならない。ただし、特定行政庁が安全上若しくは防火上の危険の度若しくは衛生上の有害の度が低いと認め、又は公益上やむを得ないと認めて許可した場合においては、この限りでない。
(11) Buildings set forth in row (k) of Appended Table 2 must not be built in Quasi-industrial Districts. Provided, however, that this shall not apply when the Designated Administrative Agency has granted permission after concluding that there is little likely detriment to safety, fire prevention or sanitation, or that it is permissible in light of the public interest.
１２　工業地域内においては、別表第二（を）項に掲げる建築物は、建築してはならない。ただし、特定行政庁が工業の利便上又は公益上必要と認めて許可した場合においては、この限りでない。
(12) Buildings set forth in row (l) of Appended Table 2 must not be built in Industrial Districts. Provided, however, that this shall not apply when the Designated Administrative Agency has granted permission after concluding that it is necessary for the conducting of industry or for the public interest.
１３　工業専用地域内においては、別表第二（わ）項に掲げる建築物は、建築してはならない。ただし、特定行政庁が工業の利便を害するおそれがないと認め、又は公益上やむを得ないと認めて許可した場合においては、この限りでない。
(13) Buildings set forth in row (m) of Appended Table 2 must not be built in Exclusive Industrial Districts. Provided, however, that this shall not apply when the Designated Administrative Agency has granted permission after concluding that there is no likely detriment to the conducting of industry, or that it is permissible in light of the public interest.
１４　第一種低層住居専用地域、第二種低層住居専用地域、第一種中高層住居専用地域、第二種中高層住居専用地域、第一種住居地域、第二種住居地域、準住居地域、田園住居地域、近隣商業地域、商業地域、準工業地域、工業地域又は工業専用地域（以下「用途地域」と総称する。）の指定のない区域（都市計画法第七条第一項に規定する市街化調整区域を除く。）内においては、別表第二（か）項に掲げる建築物は、建築してはならない。ただし、特定行政庁が当該区域における適正かつ合理的な土地利用及び環境の保全を図る上で支障がないと認め、又は公益上やむを得ないと認めて許可した場合においては、この限りでない。
(14) Buildings set forth in row (n) of Appended Table 2 must not be built in areas that are not designated as Category 1 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Category 2 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Category 1 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Category 2 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Category 1 Residential Districts, Category 2 Residential Districts, Quasi-residential Districts, Countryside Residential Districts, Neighborhood Commercial Districts, Commercial Districts, Quasi-industrial Districts, Industrial Districts or Exclusive Industrial Districts (hereinafter referred to as "Use Districts") (excluding Urbanization Control Areas as defined in Article 7, paragraph (1) of the City Planning Act). Provided, however, that this shall not apply when the Designated Administrative Agency has granted permission after concluding that there is no objection from the viewpoint of appropriate and rational land use and conservation of the environment in the relevant areas, or that it is permissible in light of the public interest.
１５　特定行政庁は、前各項のただし書の規定による許可（次項において「特例許可」という。）をする場合においては、あらかじめ、その許可に利害関係を有する者の出頭を求めて公開により意見を聴取し、かつ、建築審査会の同意を得なければならない。
(15) When the Designated Administrative Agency grants permission (referred to the following paragraph as, "special permission") under the proviso of each preceding paragraph, it must hold a public hearing in advance, requesting the presence of persons having interests in that permission, and further, obtain the consent of the Building Review Council.
１６　前項の規定にかかわらず、特定行政庁は、第一号に該当する場合においては同項の規定による意見の聴取及び同意の取得を要せず、第二号に該当する場合においては同項の規定による同意の取得を要しない。
(16) Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the Designated Administrative Agency is not required to hold a hearing or obtain consent under the provisions of that paragraph when coming under item (i), and the Agency is not required to obtain consent under the provisions of that paragraph when coming under item (ii).
一　特例許可を受けた建築物の増築、改築又は移転（これらのうち、政令で定める場合に限る。）について特例許可をする場合
(i) when special permission is given concerning the addition, rebuilding or relocation (limited to cases that are specified by Cabinet Order) of a building to which special permission has been granted;
二　日常生活に必要な政令で定める建築物で、騒音又は振動の発生その他の事象による住居の環境の悪化を防止するために必要な国土交通省令で定める措置が講じられているものの建築について特例許可（第一項から第七項までの規定のただし書の規定によるものに限る。）をする場合
(ii) when special permission (limited to that under the proviso referred to in paragraphs (1) through (7)) is given concerning buildings required for daily activities that are specified by Cabinet Order, and for which measures to be specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order that are required in order to prevent the deterioration of the residential environment resulting from phenomena such as noise or vibration.
１７　特定行政庁は、第十五項の規定により意見を聴取する場合においては、その許可しようとする建築物の建築の計画並びに意見の聴取の期日及び場所を期日の三日前までに公告しなければならない。
(17) In cases where the Designated Administrative Agency hears opinions pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (15), it must give public notice of the plan for the building of the building to be granted permission, and the hearing date and place, not later than three days before that date.
（特別用途地区）
(Special Use Districts)
第四十九条　特別用途地区内においては、前条第一項から第十三項までに定めるものを除くほか、その地区の指定の目的のためにする建築物の建築の制限又は禁止に関して必要な規定は、地方公共団体の条例で定める。
Article 49  (1) With respect to Special Use Districts, necessary provisions, other than those of paragraphs (1) through (12) of the preceding Article, necessary provisions concerning the restriction or prohibition of buildings for the purpose of designating those zones shall be specified by ordinances of the local government.
２　特別用途地区内においては、地方公共団体は、その地区の指定の目的のために必要と認める場合においては、国土交通大臣の承認を得て、条例で、前条第一項から第十三項までの規定による制限を緩和することができる。
(2) With respect to Special Use Districts, the local government may relax the restrictions under paragraphs (1) through (13) of the preceding Article by ordinances upon obtaining the approval of the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism if it deems it necessary for the purpose of designating those districts.
（特定用途制限地域）
(Special Use Restriction District)
第四十九条の二　特定用途制限地域内における建築物の用途の制限は、当該特定用途制限地域に関する都市計画に即し、政令で定める基準に従い、地方公共団体の条例で定める。
Article 49-2  Restrictions on the use of a building in a Special Use Restriction District shall comply with city planning for the relevant Special Use Restriction District and shall be established under by ordinances of a local government in accordance with criteria established by Cabinet Order.
（用途地域等における建築物の敷地、構造又は建築設備に対する制限）
(Restrictions on the Site, Construction or Building Equipment of Buildings in Use Districts)
第五十条　用途地域、特別用途地区、特定用途制限地域、都市再生特別地区、居住環境向上用途誘導地区又は特定用途誘導地区内における建築物の敷地、構造又は建築設備に関する制限で当該地域又は地区の指定の目的のために必要なものは、地方公共団体の条例で定める。
Article 50  Restrictions on the site, construction or building equipment of buildings in Use Districts, Special Use Districts, Special Use Restriction Districts, Special Districts for Urban Renaissances, Guided Land Use Districts for Residential Environment Improvement or Special Use Attraction District which are necessary for the purpose of designating those districts or zones, shall be specified by ordinances of the local government.
（卸売市場等の用途に供する特殊建築物の位置）
(Location of Special Buildings for Land Use as Wholesale Markets)
第五十一条　都市計画区域内においては、卸売市場、火葬場又はと畜場、汚物処理場、ごみ焼却場その他政令で定める処理施設の用途に供する建築物は、都市計画においてその敷地の位置が決定しているものでなければ、新築し、又は増築してはならない。ただし、特定行政庁が都道府県都市計画審議会（その敷地の位置を都市計画に定めるべき者が市町村であり、かつ、その敷地が所在する市町村に市町村都市計画審議会が置かれている場合にあつては、当該市町村都市計画審議会）の議を経てその敷地の位置が都市計画上支障がないと認めて許可した場合又は政令で定める規模の範囲内において新築し、若しくは増築する場合においては、この限りでない。
Article 51  In the City Planning Area, buildings for use as wholesale markets, crematoria, slaughter houses, waste disposal plants, waste incinerating plants, or other disposal facilities specified by Cabinet Order must not be newly constructed nor added, unless the locations of their sites have been decided in City Planning. Provided, however, that this shall not apply when the Designated Administrative Agency has granted permission, after determining through deliberations by the Prefectural City Planning Council (in a case where the person that should stipulate the location of the site in City Planning is the municipality, and there is a Municipal City Planning Council in the city, town or village where the relevant site is located, the relevant Municipal City Planning Council), that the location of the relevant site will not hamper City Planning, or if relevant buildings are newly constructed or added in accordance with scale specified by Cabinet Order.
第四節　建築物の敷地及び構造
Section 4 Site and Construction of Buildings
（容積率）
(Floor Area Ratio)
第五十二条　建築物の延べ面積の敷地面積に対する割合（以下「容積率」という。）は、次の各号に掲げる区分に従い、当該各号に定める数値以下でなければならない。ただし、当該建築物が第五号に掲げる建築物である場合において、第三項の規定により建築物の延べ面積の算定に当たりその床面積が当該建築物の延べ面積に算入されない部分を有するときは、当該部分の床面積を含む当該建築物の容積率は、当該建築物がある第一種住居地域、第二種住居地域、準住居地域、近隣商業地域又は準工業地域に関する都市計画において定められた第二号に定める数値の一・五倍以下でなければならない。
Article 52  (1) The ratio of the total floor area to the site area of a building (hereinafter referred to as "floor area ratio") shall not exceed the value designated in each item concerned, according to the classification set forth in the following items. Provided, however, when the relevant building is one set forth in item (v) and when any part of it is not accounted for in the calculation of the total floor area pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (3), the ratio of the total floor area, including the relevant part to the site area, must not exceed 1.5 times the value provided for in item (ii), specified in city planning for Category 1 Residential Districts, Category 2 Residential Districts, Quasi-residential Districts, Neighborhood Commercial Districts, or Quasi-industrial Districts where the relevant building is located:
一　第一種低層住居専用地域、第二種低層住居専用地域又は田園住居地域内の建築物（第六号及び第七号に掲げる建築物を除く。）　十分の五、十分の六、十分の八、十分の十、十分の十五又は十分の二十のうち当該地域に関する都市計画において定められたもの
(i) buildings in Category 1 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Category 2 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, or Countryside Residential Districts (excluding buildings set forth in items (vi) and (vii)): As specified in city planning for the relevant areas from among 5/10, 6/10, 8/10, 10/10, 15/10, and 20/10;
二　第一種中高層住居専用地域若しくは第二種中高層住居専用地域内の建築物（第六号及び第七号に掲げる建築物を除く。）又は第一種住居地域、第二種住居地域、準住居地域、近隣商業地域若しくは準工業地域内の建築物（第五号から第七号までに掲げる建築物を除く。）　十分の十、十分の十五、十分の二十、十分の三十、十分の四十又は十分の五十のうち当該地域に関する都市計画において定められたもの
(ii) buildings in Category 1 or Category 2 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts (excluding buildings set forth in items (vi) and (vii)), Category 1 and Category 2 Residential Districts, Quasi-residential Districts, Neighborhood Commercial Districts, or Quasi-industrial Districts (excluding buildings set forth in items (vi) and (vii)): As specified in city planning for the relevant areas from among 10/10, 15/10, 20/10, 30/10, 40/10 and 50/10;
三　商業地域内の建築物（第六号及び第七号に掲げる建築物を除く。）　十分の二十、十分の三十、十分の四十、十分の五十、十分の六十、十分の七十、十分の八十、十分の九十、十分の百、十分の百十、十分の百二十又は十分の百三十のうち当該地域に関する都市計画において定められたもの
(iii) buildings in Commercial Districts (excluding buildings set forth in item (vi)): As specified in city planning for the relevant areas from among 20/10, 30/10, 40/10, 50/10, 60/10, 70/10, 80/10, 90/10, 100/10, 110/10, 120/10, and 130/10;
四　工業地域内の建築物（第六号及び第七号に掲げる建築物を除く。）又は工業専用地域内の建築物　十分の十、十分の十五、十分の二十、十分の三十又は十分の四十のうち当該地域に関する都市計画において定められたもの
(iv) buildings in Industrial Districts or Exclusive Industrial Districts (excluding buildings set forth in items (vi) and (vii)): As specified in the city planning for the relevant area from among 10/10, 15/10, 20/10, 30/10 and 40/10;
五　高層住居誘導地区内の建築物（第七号に掲げる建築物を除く。）であつて、その住宅の用途に供する部分の床面積の合計がその延べ面積の三分の二以上であるもの（当該高層住居誘導地区に関する都市計画において建築物の敷地面積の最低限度が定められたときは、その敷地面積が当該最低限度以上のものに限る。）　当該建築物がある第一種住居地域、第二種住居地域、準住居地域、近隣商業地域又は準工業地域に関する都市計画において定められた第二号に定める数値から、その一・五倍以下で当該建築物の住宅の用途に供する部分の床面積の合計のその延べ面積に対する割合に応じて政令で定める方法により算出した数値までの範囲内で、当該高層住居誘導地区に関する都市計画において定められたもの
(v) buildings in High-rise Residential Attraction Districts (excluding buildings set forth in item (vii)) in which the total floor area of the part of the building provided for residential use is 2/3 or more of the total floor area of the building (limited to those of which site area is equal to or greater than the lower limit when the minimum building site area is specified in city planning for the relevant High-rise Residential Attraction Districts): A value within a range extending from the value mentioned in item (ii) specified by the city planning for Category 1 Residential Districts, Category 2 Residential Districts, Quasi-residential Districts, Neighborhood Commercial Districts, or Quasi-industrial Districts to a value no higher than 1.5 times the relevant value, and when the value is calculated by a method established by Cabinet Order according to the ratio of the total floor area of the part of the building provided for residential use of the relevant building to the total floor area, which is a value specified in the city planning for the relevant High-rise residential Attraction Districts;
六　居住環境向上用途誘導地区内の建築物であつて、その全部又は一部を当該居住環境向上用途誘導地区に関する都市計画において定められた誘導すべき用途に供するもの　当該居住環境向上用途誘導地区に関する都市計画において定められた数値
(vi) buildings within Guided Land Use Districts for Residential Environment Improvement, all or part of which are provided for the use to be induced that has been specified in city planning for the relevant Guided Land Use Districts for Residential Environment Improvement: Values specified in the city planning for the relevant Guided Land Use Districts for Residential Environment Improvement;
七　特定用途誘導地区内の建築物であつて、その全部又は一部を当該特定用途誘導地区に関する都市計画において定められた誘導すべき用途に供するもの　当該特定用途誘導地区に関する都市計画において定められた数値
(vii) buildings within Special Use Attraction Districts and all or part of which the building is provided for the use to be induced that has been specified in the city planning for the relevant Special Use Attraction Districts: Values specified in the city planning for the relevant Special Use Attraction Districts;
八　用途地域の指定のない区域内の建築物　十分の五、十分の八、十分の十、十分の二十、十分の三十又は十分の四十のうち、特定行政庁が土地利用の状況等を考慮し当該区域を区分して都道府県都市計画審議会の議を経て定めるもの
(viii) buildings in areas without Use District designation: 5/10, 8/10 10/10, 20/10, 30/10 or 40/10; the Designated Administrative Agency shall categorize the relevant district, taking into account land use conditions and shall then select the value applied from among these values through consultations with the Prefectural City Planning Council.
２　前項に定めるもののほか、前面道路（前面道路が二以上あるときは、その幅員の最大のもの。以下この項及び第十二項において同じ。）の幅員が十二メートル未満である建築物の容積率は、当該前面道路の幅員のメートルの数値に、次の各号に掲げる区分に従い、当該各号に定める数値を乗じたもの以下でなければならない。
(2) In addition to those set forth in the preceding paragraph, the floor area ratio of a building where the width of the front road (when there are two or more front roads, the width of the widest; the same shall apply in the remainder of this paragraph and in paragraph (12)) is less than 12 meters must be equal to or less than the value obtained by multiplying the value of the width of the relevant front road in meters by a value established in that item according to the category specified by the following items:
一　第一種低層住居専用地域、第二種低層住居専用地域又は田園住居地域内の建築物　十分の四
(i) buildings in a Category 1 or Category 2 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, or Countryside Residential Districts: 4/10;
二　第一種中高層住居専用地域若しくは第二種中高層住居専用地域内の建築物又は第一種住居地域、第二種住居地域若しくは準住居地域内の建築物（高層住居誘導地区内の建築物であつて、その住宅の用途に供する部分の床面積の合計がその延べ面積の三分の二以上であるもの（当該高層住居誘導地区に関する都市計画において建築物の敷地面積の最低限度が定められたときは、その敷地面積が当該最低限度以上のものに限る。第五十六条第一項第二号ハ及び別表第三の四の項において同じ。）を除く。）　十分の四（特定行政庁が都道府県都市計画審議会の議を経て指定する区域内の建築物にあつては、十分の六）
(ii) buildings in a Category 1 or Category 2 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Category 1 or Category 2 Residential Districts and Quasi-residential Districts (excluding buildings in High-rise residential Attraction Districts in which the total floor area of the part of the building provided for residential use is 2/3 or more of the total floor area of the building (when a lower limit of the site area of the building has been specified by the city planning for the relevant High-rise residential Attraction Districts, limited to those with site area equal to or larger than the relevant lower limit; the same shall apply in Article 56, paragraph (1) (item (ii), (c) and in row (4) of Appended Table 3)) : 4/10 (in the case of building in a district designated by the Designated Administrative Agency through consultations with the Prefectural City Planning Council, 6/10);
三　その他の建築物　十分の六（特定行政庁が都道府県都市計画審議会の議を経て指定する区域内の建築物にあつては、十分の四又は十分の八のうち特定行政庁が都道府県都市計画審議会の議を経て定めるもの）
(iii) other buildings: 6/10 (in the case of a building in a district designated by the Designated Administrative Agency through consultations with the Prefectural City Planning Council, 4/10 or 8/10, as decided by the Designated Administrative Agency through consultations with the Prefectural City Planning Council).
３　第一項（ただし書を除く。）、前項、第七項、第十二項及び第十四項、第五十七条の二第三項第二号、第五十七条の三第二項、第五十九条第一項及び第三項、第五十九条の二第一項、第六十条第一項、第六十条の二第一項及び第四項、第六十八条の三第一項、第六十八条の四、第六十八条の五（第二号イを除く。第六項において同じ。）、第六十八条の五の二（第二号イを除く。第六項において同じ。）、第六十八条の五の三第一項（第一号ロを除く。第六項において同じ。）、第六十八条の五の四（ただし書及び第一号ロを除く。）、第六十八条の五の五第一項第一号ロ、第六十八条の八、第六十八条の九第一項、第八十六条第三項及び第四項、第八十六条の二第二項及び第三項、第八十六条の五第三項並びに第八十六条の六第一項に規定する建築物の容積率（第五十九条第一項、第六十条の二第一項及び第六十八条の九第一項に規定するものについては、建築物の容積率の最高限度に係る場合に限る。第六項において同じ。）の算定の基礎となる延べ面積には、建築物の地階でその天井が地盤面からの高さ一メートル以下にあるものの住宅又は老人ホーム、福祉ホームその他これらに類するもの（以下この項及び第六項において「老人ホーム等」という。）の用途に供する部分（第六項の政令で定める昇降機の昇降路の部分又は共同住宅若しくは老人ホーム等の共用の廊下若しくは階段の用に供する部分を除く。以下この項において同じ。）の床面積（当該床面積が当該建築物の住宅及び老人ホーム等の用途に供する部分の床面積の合計の三分の一を超える場合においては、当該建築物の住宅及び老人ホーム等の用途に供する部分の床面積の合計の三分の一）は、算入しないものとする。
(3) The total floor area that is the basis for the calculation of the floor area ratio (in cases set forth in Article 59, paragraph (1); Article 60-2, paragraph (1) and Article 68-9, paragraph (1), limited to cases related to the upper limit of the floor area ratio of the building; the same in paragraph (6)) of buildings provided for in paragraph (1) (excluding the proviso), the preceding paragraph, paragraph (7), paragraph (12), and paragraph (14), Article 57-2, paragraph (3), item (ii) ; Article 57-3, paragraph (2); Article 59, paragraph (1) and paragraph (3); Article 59-2, paragraph (1); Article 60, paragraph (1); Article 60-2, paragraph (1) and paragraph (4); Article 68-3, paragraph (1); Article 68-4, Article 68-5 (excluding item (ii), (a); the same in paragraph (6)), Article 68-5-2, (excluding item (ii), (a); the same in paragraph (6)), Article 68-5-3, paragraph (1) (excluding item (i), (b); the same in paragraph (6)), Article 68-5-4, (excluding the proviso and item (i), (b)), Article 68-5-5, paragraph (1), item (i), (b); Article 68-8, and Article 68-9, paragraph (1); Article 86, paragraph (3) and (4); Article 86-2, paragraph (2) and (3); Article 86-5, paragraph (3); and Article 86-6, paragraph (1); shall not include the floor area (if the relevant total floor area exceeds 1/3 of the total floor area of parts provided for residential use or as a home for the aged, etc., in the relevant building, 1/3 of the total floor area of parts provided for residential use or as a home for the aged, etc., in the relevant building) of parts provided for residential use in a house, home for the aged, or similar building (referred in the remainder of this paragraph as "home for the aged, etc.") (excluding parts provided for use as hoistways for elevator equipment as specified by Cabinet Order in paragraph (6), or corridors or stairways that are common areas of apartment buildings; the same shall apply in this paragraph) in the basement of a home for the aged, etc., with a ceiling no higher than 1 meter above the ground surface.
４　前項の地盤面とは、建築物が周囲の地面と接する位置の平均の高さにおける水平面をいい、その接する位置の高低差が三メートルを超える場合においては、その高低差三メートル以内ごとの平均の高さにおける水平面をいう。
(4) The ground surface level, referred to in the preceding paragraph, shall refer to the horizontal surface at the average height of locations where the building is in contact with the surrounding ground surface, and if the level difference of locations that it is in contact with exceeds 3 meters, it shall refer to a horizontal surface at an average height within each of the 3 meters level differences.
５　地方公共団体は、土地の状況等により必要と認める場合においては、前項の規定にかかわらず、政令で定める基準に従い、条例で、区域を限り、第三項の地盤面を別に定めることができる。
(5) A local government shall, when it is recognized to be necessary in light of land conditions, etc., notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph, identify a proper ground-surface level within a limited district, in paragraph (3), in accordance with standards established by Cabinet Order, stated in its Ordinances.
６　第一項、第二項、次項、第十二項及び第十四項、第五十七条の二第三項第二号、第五十七条の三第二項、第五十九条第一項及び第三項、第五十九条の二第一項、第六十条第一項、第六十条の二第一項及び第四項、第六十八条の三第一項、第六十八条の四、第六十八条の五、第六十八条の五の二、第六十八条の五の三第一項、第六十八条の五の四（第一号ロを除く。）、第六十八条の五の五第一項第一号ロ、第六十八条の八、第六十八条の九第一項、第八十六条第三項及び第四項、第八十六条の二第二項及び第三項、第八十六条の五第三項並びに第八十六条の六第一項に規定する建築物の容積率の算定の基礎となる延べ面積には、政令で定める昇降機の昇降路の部分又は共同住宅若しくは老人ホーム等の共用の廊下若しくは階段の用に供する部分の床面積は、算入しないものとする。
(6) The total floor area that is the basis for the calculation of the floor area ratio of a building provided for in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), the following paragraph, paragraph (12) and paragraph (14), Article 57-2, paragraph (3), item (ii); Article 57-3, paragraph (2); Article 59, paragraph (1) and paragraph (3); Article 59-2, paragraph (1); Article 60, paragraph (1); Article 60-2, paragraph (1) and paragraph (4); Article 68-3, paragraph (1); Article 68-4; Article 68-5; Article 68-5-2; Article 68-5-3, paragraph (1); Article 68-5-4 (excluding item (i), (b)); Article 68-5-5, paragraph (1), item (i), (b); Article 68-8; Article 68-9, paragraph (1); Article 86, paragraph (3) and paragraph (4); Article 86-2, paragraph (2) and paragraph (3); Article 86-5, paragraph (3); and Article 86-6, paragraph (1) shall not include hoistways for elevatory equipment as specified by Cabinet Order or the floor surfaces of parts provided for use as corridors or stairways that are common areas of apartment houses.
７　建築物の敷地が第一項及び第二項の規定による建築物の容積率に関する制限を受ける地域、地区又は区域の二以上にわたる場合においては、当該建築物の容積率は、第一項及び第二項の規定による当該各地域、地区又は区域内の建築物の容積率の限度にその敷地の当該地域、地区又は区域内にある各部分の面積の敷地面積に対する割合を乗じて得たものの合計以下でなければならない。
(7) If the site of a building extends into two or more areas, districts, or zones subject to the restrictions on the floor area ratio of a building under paragraphs (1) and (2), the floor area ratio of the relevant building must not exceed the aggregate of values obtained by multiplying the limit of the floor area ratio of the building specified for the relevant each area, district or zone under paragraphs (1) and (2), by the ratio of the part of the site located in the relevant area, district or zone to the whole site area.
８　その全部又は一部を住宅の用途に供する建築物（居住環境向上用途誘導地区内の建築物であつてその一部を当該居住環境向上用途誘導地区に関する都市計画において定められた誘導すべき用途に供するもの及び特定用途誘導地区内の建築物であつてその一部を当該特定用途誘導地区に関する都市計画において定められた誘導すべき用途に供するものを除く。）であつて次に掲げる条件に該当するものについては、当該建築物がある地域に関する都市計画において定められた第一項第二号又は第三号に定める数値の一・五倍以下で当該建築物の住宅の用途に供する部分の床面積の合計のその延べ面積に対する割合に応じて政令で定める方法により算出した数値（特定行政庁が都道府県都市計画審議会の議を経て指定する区域内にあつては、当該都市計画において定められた数値から当該算出した数値までの範囲内で特定行政庁が都道府県都市計画審議会の議を経て別に定めた数値）を同項第二号又は第三号に定める数値とみなして、同項及び第三項から前項までの規定を適用する。ただし、当該建築物が第三項の規定により建築物の延べ面積の算定に当たりその床面積が当該建築物の延べ面積に算入されない部分を有するときは、当該部分の床面積を含む当該建築物の容積率は、当該建築物がある地域に関する都市計画において定められた第一項第二号又は第三号に定める数値の一・五倍以下でなければならない。
(8) In the case of a building (excluding buildings within Guided Land Use Districts for Residential Environment Improvement and part of which the building is provided for the use to be induced that has been specified in the city planning for the relevant Guided Land Use Districts for Residential Environment Improvement and buildings within Special Use Attraction Districts and part of which the building is provided for the use to be induced that has been specified in the city planning for the relevant Special Use Attraction Districts) all or part of which is provided for residential use and when it satisfies the following conditions, the provisions of paragraph (1) and paragraph (3) through the preceding paragraph shall apply, assuming that a value that is no higher than 1.5 times the value provided for in paragraph (1), item (ii) or (iii) provided for in city planning for the area where the relevant building is located and which has been calculated by a method established by Cabinet Order according to the ratio of the according to the ratio of the total floor area of the part of the building provided for residential use of the relevant building to the total floor area (in an area designated by the Designated Administrative Agency through consultations with the Prefectural City Planning Council, a value separately specified by the Designated Administrative Agency through consultations with the Prefectural City Planning Council within a range from the value in the relevant city planning to the relevant calculated value) is the value provided for by item (ii) or (iii) of that paragraph. Provided, however, when there is a part of the relevant building of which floor area was not included in the total floor area of the relevant building for the calculation of the total floor area of the relevant building pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (3), the floor area ratio of the relevant building, including the floor area of the relevant part, must be no higher than 1.5 times a value provided for in paragraph (1), item (ii) or (iii) specified by city planning for the area where the relevant building is located:
一　第一種住居地域、第二種住居地域、準住居地域、近隣商業地域若しくは準工業地域（高層住居誘導地区及び特定行政庁が都道府県都市計画審議会の議を経て指定する区域を除く。）又は商業地域（特定行政庁が都道府県都市計画審議会の議を経て指定する区域を除く。）内にあること。
(i) it is located in Category 1 Residential Districts, Category 2 Residential Districts, Quasi-residential Districts, Neighborhood Commercial Districts, or Quasi-industrial Districts (excluding High-rise residential Attraction Districts and areas designated by the Designated Administrative Agency through consultations with the Prefectural City Planning Council) or Commercial Districts (excluding areas designated by the Designated Administrative Agency through consultations with the Prefectural City Planning Council);
二　その敷地内に政令で定める規模以上の空地（道路に接して有効な部分が政令で定める規模以上であるものに限る。）を有し、かつ、その敷地面積が政令で定める規模以上であること。
(ii) its site includes open space equal to or larger than that specified by Cabinet Order (limited to those for which the part effectively in contact with a road is equal to or larger than that specified by Cabinet Order), and the area of the site is equal to or larger than that specified by Cabinet Order.
９　建築物の敷地が、幅員十五メートル以上の道路（以下この項において「特定道路」という。）に接続する幅員六メートル以上十二メートル未満の前面道路のうち当該特定道路からの延長が七十メートル以内の部分において接する場合における当該建築物に対する第二項から第七項までの規定の適用については、第二項中「幅員」とあるのは、「幅員（第九項の特定道路に接続する同項の前面道路のうち当該特定道路からの延長が七十メートル以内の部分にあつては、その幅員に、当該特定道路から当該建築物の敷地が接する当該前面道路の部分までの延長に応じて政令で定める数値を加えたもの）」とする。
(9) If the site of a building abuts on a front road of at least 6 meters but less than 12 meters in width, and which connects with a road of at least 15 meters in width (referred to in this paragraph as a "specified road") and the site is located within a distance of 70 meters along the relevant front road measured from the relevant specified road, in applying the provisions referred to in paragraph (2) through paragraph (7), the word "width" mentioned in paragraph (1) shall read "width (for a front road connecting with the specified road in paragraph (9), if it is within the distance of 70 meters of the relevant specified road, the width is added by a certain value specified by Cabinet Order in accordance with the distance from the relevant specified road to the relevant front road on which the relevant building abuts.)"
１０　建築物の敷地が都市計画において定められた計画道路（第四十二条第一項第四号に該当するものを除くものとし、以下この項において「計画道路」という。）に接する場合又は当該敷地内に計画道路がある場合において、特定行政庁が交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めて許可した建築物については、当該計画道路を第二項の前面道路とみなして、同項から第七項まで及び前項の規定を適用するものとする。この場合においては、当該敷地のうち計画道路に係る部分の面積は、敷地面積又は敷地の部分の面積に算入しないものとする。
(10) If the site of a building abuts on a projecting road that is designated in the City Planning (excluding roads coming under Article 42, paragraph (1), item (iv); referred to in this paragraph as a "projecting road") or where a projecting road lies within the relevant site, the relevant projecting road shall be regarded as a front road, as mentioned in paragraph (1), and the provisions of paragraphs (2) through (7) shall apply to buildings that the Designated Administrative Agency has permitted after concluding that there is no objection from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire prevention and sanitation. In this case, the part of the relevant site overlapping the projecting road shall not be calculated in the area of the relevant site or any part thereof.
１１　前面道路の境界線又はその反対側の境界線からそれぞれ後退して壁面線の指定がある場合において、特定行政庁が次に掲げる基準に適合すると認めて許可した建築物については、当該前面道路の境界線又はその反対側の境界線は、それぞれ当該壁面線にあるものとみなして、第二項から第七項まで及び第九項の規定を適用するものとする。この場合においては、当該建築物の敷地のうち前面道路と壁面線との間の部分の面積は、敷地面積又は敷地の部分の面積に算入しないものとする。
(11) If wall alignment is designated behind the boundary line of a front road and the opposite boundary line, each boundary line of the relevant front road is considered to be located on the wall alignment, when the provisions of paragraphs (2) through (7), and paragraph (9) shall apply to buildings that the Designated Administrative Agency has permitted after concluding that the buildings conform to the following standards. In this case, the section between the front road and the wall alignment on the site of the relevant building shall not be calculated in the area of the relevant site or any part thereof:
一　当該建築物がある街区内における土地利用の状況等からみて、その街区内において、前面道路と壁面線との間の敷地の部分が当該前面道路と一体的かつ連続的に有効な空地として確保されており、又は確保されることが確実と見込まれること。
(i) judging from the state of land use in the block where the relevant building is located, part of the site between the front road and the wall alignment in this block is obtained or there is a possibility that the relevant part will be obtained as effective space that is integrated with and linked to the relevant front road;
二　交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないこと。
(ii) it is not detrimental from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire prevention and sanitation.
１２　第二項各号の規定により前面道路の幅員のメートルの数値に乗ずる数値が十分の四とされている建築物で、前面道路の境界線から後退して壁面線の指定がある場合又は第六十八条の二第一項の規定に基づく条例で定める壁面の位置の制限（道路に面する建築物の壁又はこれに代わる柱の位置及び道路に面する高さ二メートルを超える門又は塀の位置を制限するものに限る。）がある場合において当該壁面線又は当該壁面の位置の制限として定められた限度の線（以下この項及び次項において「壁面線等」という。）を越えないもの（ひさしその他の建築物の部分で政令で定めるものを除く。）については、当該前面道路の境界線は、当該壁面線等にあるものとみなして、第二項から第七項まで及び第九項の規定を適用することができる。ただし、建築物の容積率は、当該前面道路の幅員のメートルの数値に十分の六を乗じたもの以下でなければならない。
(12) Regarding a building for which the value that is multiplied by the width of the front road in meters is considered to be 4/10 pursuant to the provisions of each item of paragraph (2), in a case where the wall alignment is a designated set back from the boundary with the front road or in a case where a restriction on the location of the wall surface specified by an ordinance based on the provisions of Article 68-2, paragraph (1) (limited to restrictions on position of the wall of the building facing the road or of a column that replaces the relevant wall and on the location of a gate or fence with height in excess of 2 meters, and which faces the road), and the limit line established as the limit of the location of the relevant wall alignment or the relevant wall surface (referred to in this paragraph and the following paragraph as, "wall surface alignment etc.") is not exceeded, (excluding pent roofs and other parts of buildings specified by Cabinet Order) the boundary line of the relevant front road shall be considered to be the relevant wall alignment, etc., and it shall be possible to apply the provisions of paragraphs (2) through (7), and paragraph (9). Providing, however, the floor area ratio of the building must be equal to or less than the value calculated by multiplying the width of the relevant front road in meters by 6/10.
１３　前項の場合においては、当該建築物の敷地のうち前面道路と壁面線等との間の部分の面積は、敷地面積又は敷地の部分の面積に算入しないものとする。
(13) The area between the front road and the wall alignment, etc. on the site of the relevant building shall not be calculated in the area of the relevant site or any part thereof, under the case of the preceding paragraph.
１４　次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物で、特定行政庁が交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めて許可したものの容積率は、第一項から第九項までの規定にかかわらず、その許可の範囲内において、これらの規定による限度を超えるものとすることができる。
(14) With respect to buildings that come under any of the following items and which the Designated Administrative Agency has permitted after concluding that there is no objection from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire prevention and sanitation, the floor area ratio may, notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (1) through (9), exceed the limits under these provisions within the scope of the permission:
一　同一敷地内の建築物の機械室その他これに類する部分の床面積の合計の建築物の延べ面積に対する割合が著しく大きい場合におけるその敷地内の建築物
(i) buildings on sites where the ratio of the aggregate of floor areas of the machine room and other similar parts of the building to the total floor area thereof is excessively large;
二　その敷地の周囲に広い公園、広場、道路その他の空地を有する建築物
(ii) buildings that have large parks, public squares, roads or other open spaces around their sites;
１５　第四十四条第二項の規定は、第十項、第十一項又は前項の規定による許可をする場合に準用する。
(15) The provision of Article 44 paragraph (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis when permission is granted under paragraph (10), (11), or the preceding paragraph.
（建蔽率）
(Building Coverage Ratio)
第五十三条　建築物の建築面積（同一敷地内に二以上の建築物がある場合においては、その建築面積の合計）の敷地面積に対する割合（以下「建蔽率」という。）は、次の各号に掲げる区分に従い、当該各号に定める数値を超えてはならない。
Article 53  (1) The ratio of the building area (or the aggregate of building areas if there are two or more buildings on the same site) to the site area (hereinafter referred to as "building coverage ratio") of a building shall according to the classification set forth in the following items, not exceed the value mentioned in each item concerned:
一　第一種低層住居専用地域、第二種低層住居専用地域、第一種中高層住居専用地域、第二種中高層住居専用地域、田園住居地域又は工業専用地域内の建築物　十分の三、十分の四、十分の五又は十分の六のうち当該地域に関する都市計画において定められたもの
(i) buildings in Category 1 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Category 2 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Category 1 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Category 2 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Countryside Residential Districts, or Exclusive Industrial Districts: As specified in city planning for the relevant area from among 3/10, 4/10, 5/10, and 6/10;
二　第一種住居地域、第二種住居地域、準住居地域又は準工業地域内の建築物　十分の五、十分の六又は十分の八のうち当該地域に関する都市計画において定められたもの
(ii) buildings in Category 1 Residential Districts, Category 2 Residential Districts, or Quasi-residential Districts: As specified in city planning for the relevant areafrom among 5/10, 6/10 and 8/10;
三　近隣商業地域内の建築物　十分の六又は十分の八のうち当該地域に関する都市計画において定められたもの
(iii) buildings in Neighborhood Commercial Districts: As specified in city planning for the relevant areafrom among 6/10 and 8/10;
四　商業地域内の建築物　十分の八
(iv) buildings in Commercial Districts: 8/10;
五　工業地域内の建築物　十分の五又は十分の六のうち当該地域に関する都市計画において定められたもの
(v) buildings in Industrial Districts: As specified in city planning for the relevant zone from among 5/10 and 6/10;
六　用途地域の指定のない区域内の建築物　十分の三、十分の四、十分の五、十分の六又は十分の七のうち、特定行政庁が土地利用の状況等を考慮し当該区域を区分して都道府県都市計画審議会の議を経て定めるもの
(vi) buildings in areas without Use District: 3/10, 4/10, 5/10, 6/10, or 7/10; the Designated Administrative Agency shall categorize the relevant area accounting for land use conditions and select the value applied through consultations with the Prefectural City Planning Council.
２　建築物の敷地が前項の規定による建築物の建蔽率に関する制限を受ける地域又は区域の二以上にわたる場合においては、当該建築物の建蔽率は、同項の規定による当該各地域又は区域内の建築物の建蔽率の限度にその敷地の当該地域又は区域内にある各部分の面積の敷地面積に対する割合を乗じて得たものの合計以下でなければならない。
(2) If the site of a building extends into two or more zones or areas subject to the restrictions on the building coverage ratio of a building under the preceding paragraph, the building coverage ratio of the relevant building must not exceed the aggregate of values obtained by multiplying the limit of the building coverage ratio of the building specified for each zone or area concerned under that paragraph, by the ratio of the part of the site located in the relevant zone or area to the whole site area.
３　前二項の規定の適用については、第一号又は第二号のいずれかに該当する建築物にあつては第一項各号に定める数値に十分の一を加えたものをもつて当該各号に定める数値とし、第一号及び第二号に該当する建築物にあつては同項各号に定める数値に十分の二を加えたものをもつて当該各号に定める数値とする。
(3) In applying the provisions referred to in the preceding two paragraphs, a value obtained by adding 1/10 to the value mentioned in each item of paragraph (1) shall be regarded as the value mentioned in that item as for buildings coming under either item (i) or (ii), and a value obtained by adding 2/10 to the value mentioned in each item of that paragraph shall be regarded as the value mentioned in that item as for buildings coming under items (i) and (ii):
一　防火地域（第一項第二号から第四号までの規定により建蔽率の限度が十分の八とされている地域を除く。）内にあるイに該当する建築物又は準防火地域内にあるイ若しくはロのいずれかに該当する建築物
(i) buildings in Fire Prevention Districts (excluding zones in which the limit of the building coverage ratio is specified to be 8/10 pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (1), items (ii) through (iv)), under (a), or buildings in Quasi-fire Prevention Districts under either (a) or (b);
イ　耐火建築物又はこれと同等以上の延焼防止性能（通常の火災による周囲への延焼を防止するために壁、柱、床その他の建築物の部分及び防火戸その他の政令で定める防火設備に必要とされる性能をいう。ロにおいて同じ。）を有するものとして政令で定める建築物（以下この条及び第六十七条第一項において「耐火建築物等」という。）
(a) fire-resistive buildings or buildings specified by Cabinet Order as having performance sufficient for the prevention of the spread of fire equivalent to or better than that of fire-resistive buildings (This shall mean the performance required for the parts of the building such as walls, columns or floors and an opening protective assembly to be specified by Cabinet Order, such as fire doors, in order to prevent the spread of fire to surrounding areas during a normal fire; the same shall apply to (b)) (referred to as the "fire-resistive buildings, etc." hereinafter in this Article and in Article 67, paragraph (1));
ロ　準耐火建築物又はこれと同等以上の延焼防止性能を有するものとして政令で定める建築物（耐火建築物等を除く。第八項及び第六十七条第一項において「準耐火建築物等」という。）
(b) quasi fire-resistive buildings or buildings specified by Cabinet Order as having performance for the prevention of the spread of fire that is equivalent to or better than that of quasi fire-resistive buildings (excluding fire-resistive buildings, etc.; to be quasi fire-resistive buildings, etc. in paragraph (8) and in Article 67, paragraph (1)).
二　街区の角にある敷地又はこれに準ずる敷地で特定行政庁が指定するものの内にある建築物
(ii) buildings on sites at the corner of two streets or on sites equivalent thereto as designated by the Designated Administrative Agency.
４　隣地境界線から後退して壁面線の指定がある場合又は第六十八条の二第一項の規定に基づく条例で定める壁面の位置の制限（隣地境界線に面する建築物の壁又はこれに代わる柱の位置及び隣地境界線に面する高さ二メートルを超える門又は塀の位置を制限するものに限る。）がある場合において、当該壁面線又は壁面の位置の制限として定められた限度の線を越えない建築物（ひさしその他の建築物の部分で政令で定めるものを除く。次項において同じ。）で、特定行政庁が安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めて許可したものの建蔽率は、前三項の規定にかかわらず、その許可の範囲内において、前三項の規定による限度を超えるものとすることができる。
(4) In a case where it is designated that the wall alignment be set back from the boundary line with an adjacent land lot or in a case where there is a restriction on the position of the wall surface established under an ordinance based on the provisions of Article 68-2, paragraph (1) (limited to restrictions on position of the wall of the building facing the boundary line with an adjacent land lot or of a column that replaces the relevant wall and on the location of a gate or fence with height in excess of 2 meters facing the boundary line with an adjacent land lot), the building coverage ratio that the Designated Administrative Agency has approved as not being detrimental from the viewpoint of safety, fire prevention, and sanitation of a building where the limit line established as the limit of the location of the relevant wall alignment or relevant wall surface is not exceeded, (excluding pent roofs and other parts of buildings specified by Cabinet Order), notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding three paragraphs, it shall be possible for it to exceed the limit under the preceding three paragraphs within this allowed range.
５　次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物で、特定行政庁が安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めて許可したものの建蔽率は、第一項から第三項までの規定にかかわらず、その許可の範囲内において、これらの規定による限度を超えるものとすることができる。
(5) The building coverage ratio of a building that comes under any of the following items for which permission has been granted by the Designated Administrative Agency after concluding that there is no objection from the viewpoint of safety, fire prevention or sanitation may not withstanding the provisions of paragraphs (1) through (3), exceed the limits under these provisions:
一　特定行政庁が街区における避難上及び消火上必要な機能の確保を図るため必要と認めて前面道路の境界線から後退して壁面線を指定した場合における、当該壁面線を越えない建築物
(i) buildings not exceeding a wall surface line when the wall surface line has been designated by the Designated Administrative Agency by setting it back from the boundary line of the front road after concluding that it is necessary in order to secure functions required for evacuation and for firefighting activities on the street;
二　特定防災街区整備地区に関する都市計画において特定防災機能（密集市街地整備法第二条第三号に規定する特定防災機能をいう。次号において同じ。）の確保を図るため必要な壁面の位置の制限（道路に面する建築物の壁又はこれに代わる柱の位置及び道路に面する高さ二メートルを超える門又は塀の位置を制限するものに限る。同号において同じ。）が定められた場合における、当該壁面の位置の制限として定められた限度の線を越えない建築物
(ii) if, in order to secure designated disaster prevention functions (which means the designated disaster prevention functions specified in Article 2, item (iii) of the Concentrated Urban Areas Development Act; the same shall apply in the next item), restrictions on the position of wall surfaces have been specified in city planning for Specified Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone, buildings not exceeding a boundary line (which shall be limited to the restrictions that restrict the position of the wall of a building facing the road or the column that replaces the relevant wall and the position of a gate or fence facing the road exceeding 2 meters in height; the same shall apply in that item) that has been specified as the relevant restrictions on the wall surface position;
三　第六十八条の二第一項の規定に基づく条例において防災街区整備地区計画の区域（特定建築物地区整備計画又は防災街区整備地区整備計画が定められている区域に限る。）における特定防災機能の確保を図るため必要な壁面の位置の制限が定められた場合における、当該壁面の位置の制限として定められた限度の線を越えない建築物
(iii) if restrictions on the wall surface position have been specified and that are required in order to secure specified disaster prevention functions in the zone of a Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone Plans (which shall be limited to the zone where Specified Building District Development Plans or District Development Plans for Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone District Development Plans are devised) in an ordinance under the provisions of Article 68-2, paragraph (1), which addresses buildings not exceeding a boundary line that has been specified as the relevant restrictions on the wall surface position.
６　前各項の規定は、次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物については、適用しない。
(6) The provisions of each of the preceding paragraphs shall not apply to buildings coming under any of the following items:
一　防火地域（第一項第二号から第四号までの規定により建蔽率の限度が十分の八とされている地域に限る。）内にある耐火建築物等
(i) fire-resistive buildings, etc. in Fire Prevention Districts (limited to zones in which the limit of the building coverage ratio is specified to be 8/10 pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (1), items (ii) through (iv));
二　巡査派出所、公衆便所、公共用歩廊その他これらに類するもの
(ii) police box, Public toilet, Public promenades, or anything similar thereto;
三　公園、広場、道路、川その他これらに類するものの内にある建築物で特定行政庁が安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めて許可したもの
(iii) buildings which are located in park, public square, road, river, or the like and for which permission has been granted by the Designated Administrative Agency after concluding that there is no objection from the viewpoint of safety, fire prevention or sanitation.
７　建築物の敷地が防火地域の内外にわたる場合において、その敷地内の建築物の全部が耐火建築物等であるときは、その敷地は、全て防火地域内にあるものとみなして、第三項第一号又は前項第一号の規定を適用する。
(7) If the site of a building extends into or out of a Fire Prevention District, and all of the building on the relevant site is of fire-resistive construction, etc., the relevant site shall be considered to be within the Fire Prevention District in applying the provisions of paragraph (3), item (i) or item (i) of the preceding paragraph.
８　建築物の敷地が準防火地域と防火地域及び準防火地域以外の区域とにわたる場合において、その敷地内の建築物の全部が耐火建築物等又は準耐火建築物等であるときは、その敷地は、全て準防火地域内にあるものとみなして、第三項第一号の規定を適用する。
(8) If the site of a building is located entirely within a Quasi-fire Prevention District and an area other than a Fire Prevention District and a Quasi-fire Prevention District, if all of the buildings within the site are fire-resistive buildings, etc. or quasi fire-resistive buildings, etc., the provisions of paragraph (3), item (i) shall apply to the site, considering that the entire site is located within a Quasi-fire Prevention District.
９　第四十四条第二項の規定は、第四項、第五項又は第六項第三号の規定による許可をする場合に準用する。
(9) The provisions of Article 44 paragraph (2) shall be applied mutatis mutandis in a case where authorization is given under paragraph (4), paragraph (5) or paragraph (6), item (iii).
（建築物の敷地面積）
(Site Area of a Building)
第五十三条の二　建築物の敷地面積は、用途地域に関する都市計画において建築物の敷地面積の最低限度が定められたときは、当該最低限度以上でなければならない。ただし、次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物の敷地については、この限りでない。
Article 53-2  (1) When the minimum site area of buildings is specified in a City Planning for Use Districts, the sire area of buildings must be higher than the relevant minimum limit. Provided, however, that this shall not apply to the site of buildings coming under any of the following items:
一　前条第六項第一号に掲げる建築物
(i) building set forth in paragraph (6), item (i) of the preceding Article;
二　公衆便所、巡査派出所その他これらに類する建築物で公益上必要なもの
(ii) public toilet, police box, or other building necessary for the public interest similar thereto;
三　その敷地の周囲に広い公園、広場、道路その他の空地を有する建築物であつて、特定行政庁が市街地の環境を害するおそれがないと認めて許可したもの
(iii) building with a wide park, plaza, road or other open space around its site that the Designated Administrative Agency has approved as a building that is not detrimental to the urban environment;
四　特定行政庁が用途上又は構造上やむを得ないと認めて許可したもの
(iv) those of which the Designated Administrative Agency has found that there is unavoidable because the use or the structure and granted permission.
２　前項の都市計画において建築物の敷地面積の最低限度を定める場合においては、その最低限度は、二百平方メートルを超えてはならない。
(2) In a case where a lower limit of the site area of a building is specified by a city planning in the preceding paragraph, this lower limit must not exceed 200 square meters.
３　第一項の都市計画において建築物の敷地面積の最低限度が定められ、又は変更された際、現に建築物の敷地として使用されている土地で同項の規定に適合しないもの又は現に存する所有権その他の権利に基づいて建築物の敷地として使用するならば同項の規定に適合しないこととなる土地について、その全部を一の敷地として使用する場合においては、同項の規定は、適用しない。ただし、次の各号のいずれかに該当する土地については、この限りでない。
(3) In a case where, when the lower limit of the site area of a building is specified by a city planning in paragraph (1) or the lower limit is revised, if land that is already used as the site of a building and to which the provisions of that paragraph do not apply, or land to which the provisions of that paragraph would not apply if it were used as the site of a building under ownership rights or other rights that already exist is completely used as a single site, the provisions of that paragraph shall not apply. Provided, however, that this shall not apply to land coming under any of the following items:
一　第一項の都市計画における建築物の敷地面積の最低限度が変更された際、建築物の敷地面積の最低限度に関する従前の制限に違反していた建築物の敷地又は所有権その他の権利に基づいて建築物の敷地として使用するならば当該制限に違反することとなつた土地
(i) \when the lower limit of the site area of a building in a city planning in paragraph (1) has been revised, the site of a building that contravened the previous restriction on the lower limit of the site area of a building or land that would have contravened the relevant restriction if it were used as the site of a building under ownership rights or other rights;
二　第一項の規定に適合するに至つた建築物の敷地又は所有権その他の権利に基づいて建築物の敷地として使用するならば同項の規定に適合するに至つた土地
(ii) site of a building that has become compliant with the provisions of paragraph (1) or land that would become compliant with the provisions of that paragraph if it were used as the site of a building under ownership rights or other rights.
４　第四十四条第二項の規定は、第一項第三号又は第四号の規定による許可をする場合に準用する。
(4) The provisions of Article 44, paragraph (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis when permission is given under paragraph (1) item (iii) or (iv).
（第一種低層住居専用地域等内における外壁の後退距離）
(Retrocessive Distance of Exterior Walls in Category 1 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts)
第五十四条　第一種低層住居専用地域、第二種低層住居専用地域又は田園住居地域内においては、建築物の外壁又はこれに代わる柱の面から敷地境界線までの距離（以下この条及び第八十六条の六第一項において「外壁の後退距離」という。）は、当該地域に関する都市計画において外壁の後退距離の限度が定められた場合においては、政令で定める場合を除き、当該限度以上でなければならない。
Article 54  (1) In Category 1 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Category 2 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, or Countryside Residential Districts, the distance from the face of any exterior wall or any column that replaces the relevant wall to the boundary line of the site (hereinafter in this Article and Article 86-6, paragraph (1) referred to as "retrocessive distance of exterior walls") must be not less than the relevant limit , except in cases as specified by Cabinet Order, if a limit of the retrocessive distance of exterior walls is specified in city planning for the relevant area.
２　前項の都市計画において外壁の後退距離の限度を定める場合においては、その限度は、一・五メートル又は一メートルとする。
(2) If a limit of the retrocessive distance of exterior wall is specified in city planning under the preceding paragraph, the limit shall be either 1 meter or 1.5 meters.
（第一種低層住居専用地域等内における建築物の高さの限度）
(Limit of Height of Buildings in Category 1 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts)
第五十五条　第一種低層住居専用地域、第二種低層住居専用地域又は田園住居地域内においては、建築物の高さは、十メートル又は十二メートルのうち当該地域に関する都市計画において定められた建築物の高さの限度を超えてはならない。
Article 55  (1) The height of buildings in Category 1 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Category 2 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, or Countryside Residential Districts must not exceed 10 meters or 12 meters in accordance with the limit of height of buildings as specified in city planning for the relevant area.
２　前項の都市計画において建築物の高さの限度が十メートルと定められた第一種低層住居専用地域、第二種低層住居専用地域又は田園住居地域内においては、その敷地内に政令で定める空地を有し、かつ、その敷地面積が政令で定める規模以上である建築物であつて、特定行政庁が低層住宅に係る良好な住居の環境を害するおそれがないと認めるものの高さの限度は、同項の規定にかかわらず、十二メートルとする。
(2) In Category 1 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Category 2 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, or Countryside Residential Districts where the height of buildings shall not exceed 10 meters specified in city planning under the preceding paragraph, the limit of height shall be 12 meters for buildings having open space on their sites as specified by Cabinet Order and, further, of which site areas are at least the scale specified by Cabinet Order, and which the Designated Administrative Agency has concluded that there is no likely detriment to the favorable residential environment for low-story houses.
３　前二項の規定は、次の各号の一に該当する建築物については、適用しない。
(3) The provisions of the preceding two paragraphs shall not apply to buildings coming under any of the following items:
一　その敷地の周囲に広い公園、広場、道路その他の空地を有する建築物であつて、低層住宅に係る良好な住居の環境を害するおそれがないと認めて特定行政庁が許可したもの
(i) buildings having large parks, public squares, roads or other open space around their sites, which the Designated Administrative Agency has permitted after concluding that there is no likely detriment to the favorable residential environment for low-story houses;
二　学校その他の建築物であつて、その用途によつてやむを得ないと認めて特定行政庁が許可したもの
(ii) buildings such as schools, which the Designated Administrative Agency has permitted, after determining inevitable circumstances by nature of their use.
４　第四十四条第二項の規定は、前項各号の規定による許可をする場合に準用する。
(4) The provision of Article 44, paragraph (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis when permission is granted under each item of the preceding paragraph.
（建築物の各部分の高さ）
(Height of Each Part of a Building)
第五十六条　建築物の各部分の高さは、次に掲げるもの以下としなければならない。
Article 56  (1) The height of each part of a building must not exceed that set forth in each of the following items:
一　別表第三（い）欄及び（ろ）欄に掲げる地域、地区又は区域及び容積率の限度の区分に応じ、前面道路の反対側の境界線からの水平距離が同表（は）欄に掲げる距離以下の範囲内においては、当該部分から前面道路の反対側の境界線までの水平距離に、同表（に）欄に掲げる数値を乗じて得たもの
(i) within an extent where the horizontal distance from the boundary line of the opposite side of the front road is not more than the distance set forth in column (c) of Appended Table 3, the height obtained by multiplying the horizontal distance from the part concerned to the boundary line of the opposite side of the front road, by the value set forth in column (d) of that Table, according to areas, districts, or zones and to the classification of the limit of the floor area ratio, set forth in columns (a) and (b) of that Table;
二　当該部分から隣地境界線までの水平距離に、次に掲げる区分に従い、イ若しくはニに定める数値が一・二五とされている建築物で高さが二十メートルを超える部分を有するもの又はイからニまでに定める数値が二・五とされている建築物（ロ及びハに掲げる建築物で、特定行政庁が都道府県都市計画審議会の議を経て指定する区域内にあるものを除く。以下この号及び第七項第二号において同じ。）で高さが三十一メートルを超える部分を有するものにあつては、それぞれその部分から隣地境界線までの水平距離のうち最小のものに相当する距離を加えたものに、イからニまでに定める数値を乗じて得たものに、イ又はニに定める数値が一・二五とされている建築物にあつては二十メートルを、イからニまでに定める数値が二・五とされている建築物にあつては三十一メートルを加えたもの
(ii) values obtained by adding, in accordance with the following categorization, the horizontal distance from the relevant part to the boundary line with an adjacent land lot, to the distance equivalent to the shortest horizontal distance from each part to the boundary line with the adjacent land lot in the case of a building for which the value provided for in (a) or (d) is 1.25 and which includes a part exceeding 20 meters in height, or a building for which the value provided for by (a) through (d) is 2.5 (excluding buildings set forth in (b) and (c) in areas designated by the Designated Administrative Agency through consultations with the Prefectural City Planning Council; the same in this item and in paragraph (7), item (ii)) and which includes a part exceeding 31m in height, and then multiplying the value so obtained by the values provided for from (a) to (d), and finally adding the product of this calculation to 20 meters in the case of a building for which the value provided for in (a) or (d) is 1.25, and to 31 meters in the case of a building for which the value provided for in (a) through (d) is 2.5;
イ　第一種中高層住居専用地域若しくは第二種中高層住居専用地域内の建築物又は第一種住居地域、第二種住居地域若しくは準住居地域内の建築物（ハに掲げる建築物を除く。）　一・二五（第五十二条第一項第二号の規定により容積率の限度が十分の三十以下とされている第一種中高層住居専用地域及び第二種中高層住居専用地域以外の地域のうち、特定行政庁が都道府県都市計画審議会の議を経て指定する区域内の建築物にあつては、二・五）
(a) buildings in Category 1 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts or Category 2 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, or Buildings in Category 1 Residential Districts, Category 2 Residential Districts, or Quasi-residential Districts (excluding buildings set forth in (c)): 1.25 (Buildings in areas that have been designated by the Designated Administrative Agency through consultations with the Prefectural City Planning Council and are not within Category 1 Mid/high-rise Exclusively Residential Zones or Category 2 Mid/high-rise Exclusively Residential Zones where the limit of the floor area ratio is 30/10 or less pursuant to the provisions of Article 52, paragraph (1), item (ii), 2.5);
ロ　近隣商業地域若しくは準工業地域内の建築物（ハに掲げる建築物を除く。）又は商業地域、工業地域若しくは工業専用地域内の建築物　二・五
(b) buildings in Neighborhood Commercial Districts or Quasi-industrial Districts (excluding buildings set forth in (c)), or Buildings in Commercial Districts, Industrial Districts, or Exclusive Industrial Districts: 2.5;
ハ　高層住居誘導地区内の建築物であつて、その住宅の用途に供する部分の床面積の合計がその延べ面積の三分の二以上であるもの　二・五
(c) buildings in High-rise Residential Attraction Districts in which the total floor area of the part of the building provided for residential use is 2/3 or more of the total floor area of the building: 2.5.
ニ　用途地域の指定のない区域内の建築物　一・二五又は二・五のうち、特定行政庁が土地利用の状況等を考慮し当該区域を区分して都道府県都市計画審議会の議を経て定めるもの
(d) buildings in areas with no Use Districts: 1.25 or 2.5; the Designated Administrative Agency shall categorize the relevant area accounting for land use conditions and select the value applied through consultations with the Prefectural City Planning Council.
三　第一種低層住居専用地域、第二種低層住居専用地域若しくは田園住居地域内又は第一種中高層住居専用地域若しくは第二種中高層住居専用地域（次条第一項の規定に基づく条例で別表第四の二の項に規定する（一）、（二）又は（三）の号が指定されているものを除く。以下この号及び第七項第三号において同じ。）内においては、当該部分から前面道路の反対側の境界線又は隣地境界線までの真北方向の水平距離に一・二五を乗じて得たものに、第一種低層住居専用地域、第二種低層住居専用地域又は田園住居地域内の建築物にあつては五メートルを、第一種中高層住居専用地域又は第二種中高層住居専用地域内の建築物にあつては十メートルを加えたもの
(iii) category 1 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Category 2 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, or Countryside Residential Districts, or Category 1 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts or Category 2 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts (excluding those for which the conditions of row (2), item (i), (ii) or (iii) of Appended Table 4 are specified by ordinances based on the provision of the next Article paragraph (1)), the height obtained by multiplying the horizontal distance in due north direction from the part concerned to the boundary line of the opposite side of the front road or the boundary line with the adjacent land lot by 1.25, plus 5 meters in the case of buildings in Category 1 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Category 2 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, or Countryside Residential Districts, or plus 10 meters in the case of buildings in Category 1 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts or Category 2 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts.
２　前面道路の境界線から後退した建築物に対する前項第一号の規定の適用については、同号中「前面道路の反対側の境界線」とあるのは、「前面道路の反対側の境界線から当該建築物の後退距離（当該建築物（地盤面下の部分その他政令で定める部分を除く。）から前面道路の境界線までの水平距離のうち最小のものをいう。）に相当する距離だけ外側の線」とする。
(2) In applying the provisions referred to in item (i) of the preceding paragraph to buildings retreating from the boundary line of the front road, the phrase "the opposite boundary line of the front road" in that item shall read "the line outside the distance equivalent to the retrocessive distance of the building concerned (the shortest horizontal distance from the building concerned (excluding the parts of buildings below the ground level and other parts specified by Cabinet Order) to the boundary line of the front road) from the opposite boundary line of the front road."
３　第一種中高層住居専用地域、第二種中高層住居専用地域、第一種住居地域、第二種住居地域又は準住居地域内における前面道路の幅員が十二メートル以上である建築物に対する別表第三の規定の適用については、同表（に）欄中「一・二五」とあるのは、「一・二五（前面道路の反対側の境界線からの水平距離が前面道路の幅員に一・二五を乗じて得たもの以上の区域内においては、一・五）」とする。
(3) In applying the provisions referred to in Appended Table 3 to buildings facing a front road with a width of 12 meters or more in Category 1 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Category 2 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Category 1 Residential Districts, Category 2 Residential Districts, or Quasi-residential Districts, "1.25" in column (d) in that Table shall read "1.25 (1.5 in areas where the horizontal distance from the opposite boundary line of the front road is greater than the value obtained by multiplying the width of the front road by 1.25)."
４　前項に規定する建築物で前面道路の境界線から後退したものに対する同項の規定の適用については、同項中「前面道路の反対側の境界線」とあるのは「前面道路の反対側の境界線から当該建築物の後退距離（当該建築物（地盤面下の部分その他政令で定める部分を除く。）から前面道路の境界線までの水平距離のうち最小のものをいう。以下この表において同じ。）に相当する距離だけ外側の線」と、「前面道路の幅員に」とあるのは「、前面道路の幅員に、当該建築物の後退距離に二を乗じて得たものを加えたものに」とすることができる。
(4) In applying the provisions of the preceding paragraph to buildings referred to in the preceding paragraph retreating from the boundary line of the front road in that paragraph, "the opposite boundary line of the front road" in that paragraph may read "the line outside the distance equivalent to the retrocessive distance of the building concerned (the shortest horizontal distance from the building concerned (excluding the parts of the buildings below the ground level and other parts specified by Cabinet Order); the same in this Table) to the boundary line of the front road from the opposite boundary line of the front road" and "the width of the front road" in that paragraph shall read "the width of the front road plus the value obtained by multiplying the retrocessive distance of the building concerned by 2".
５　建築物が第一項第二号及び第三号の地域、地区又は区域の二以上にわたる場合においては、これらの規定中「建築物」とあるのは、「建築物の部分」とする。
(5) If a building extends into two or more areas, districts, or zones as specified in paragraph (1), items (ii) and (iii), the "buildings" in these provisions shall read "parts of buildings."
６　建築物の敷地が二以上の道路に接し、又は公園、広場、川若しくは海その他これらに類するものに接する場合、建築物の敷地とこれに接する道路若しくは隣地との高低の差が著しい場合その他特別の事情がある場合における前各項の規定の適用の緩和に関する措置は、政令で定める。
(6) Measures for relaxing the provisions referred to in each of the preceding paragraphs shall be specified by Cabinet Order, for cases where the site of a building abuts on two or more roads, or abuts on a park, public square, river, sea or the like, where unevenness between the site of a building and the abutting road or adjacent land lot is extreme, or where there are some other special circumstances.
７　次の各号のいずれかに掲げる規定によりその高さが制限された場合にそれぞれ当該各号に定める位置において確保される採光、通風等と同程度以上の採光、通風等が当該位置において確保されるものとして政令で定める基準に適合する建築物については、それぞれ当該各号に掲げる規定は、適用しない。
(7) The provisions set forth in each of the following items shall not apply to a building that complies with criteria specified by Cabinet Order to guarantee natural lighting and ventilation etc. at each location referred to in those items that are equal to or higher than the natural lighting and ventilation guaranteed at the relevant locations provided for in those items if the height of the building is restricted by the provisions set forth in those items.
一　第一項第一号、第二項から第四項まで及び前項（同号の規定の適用の緩和に係る部分に限る。）　前面道路の反対側の境界線上の政令で定める位置
(i) paragraph (1), item (i), paragraphs (2) through (4) and the preceding paragraph (limited to parts where the application of the provisions referred to in that item are relaxed): Location specified by Cabinet Order on the boundary line on the opposite side of the front road;
二　第一項第二号、第五項及び前項（同号の規定の適用の緩和に係る部分に限る。）　隣地境界線からの水平距離が、第一項第二号イ又はニに定める数値が一・二五とされている建築物にあつては十六メートル、第一項第二号イからニまでに定める数値が二・五とされている建築物にあつては十二・四メートルだけ外側の線上の政令で定める位置
(ii) paragraph (1), item (ii), paragraph (5), and the preceding paragraph (limited to parts where the application of the provisions referred to in that item are relaxed): Location specified by Cabinet Order on a line on the outside where the horizontal distance from the boundary line with the adjacent land lot is only 16 meters in the case of a building for which the value provided for in paragraph (1), item (ii), (a) or (d) is considered to be 1.25, and only 12.4 meters for a building for which the value provided for in paragraph (1), item (ii), (a) through (d) is considered to be 2.5;
三　第一項第三号、第五項及び前項（同号の規定の適用の緩和に係る部分に限る。）　隣地境界線から真北方向への水平距離が、第一種低層住居専用地域、第二種低層住居専用地域又は田園住居地域内の建築物にあつては四メートル、第一種中高層住居専用地域又は第二種中高層住居専用地域内の建築物にあつては八メートルだけ外側の線上の政令で定める位置
(iii) paragraph (1), item (iii), paragraph (5), and the preceding paragraph (limited to parts where the application of the provisions referred to in that item are relaxed): Location specified by Cabinet Order on a line on the outside where the horizontal distance northward from the boundary line with the adjacent land lot is only 4 meters in the case of a building located in Category 1 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Category 2 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, or Countryside Residential Districts, and only 8 meters for a building located in Category 1 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts or Category 2 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts.
（日影による中高層の建築物の高さの制限）
(Restrictions on Height of Mid/high-rise-rise Buildings due to Shadow)
第五十六条の二　別表第四（い）欄の各項に掲げる地域又は区域の全部又は一部で地方公共団体の条例で指定する区域（以下この条において「対象区域」という。）内にある同表（ろ）欄の当該各項（四の項にあつては、同項イ又はロのうちから地方公共団体がその地方の気候及び風土、当該区域の土地利用の状況等を勘案して条例で指定するもの）に掲げる建築物は、冬至日の真太陽時による午前八時から午後四時まで（道の区域内にあつては、午前九時から午後三時まで）の間において、それぞれ、同表（は）欄の各項（四の項にあつては、同項イ又はロ）に掲げる平均地盤面からの高さ（二の項及び三の項にあつては、当該各項に掲げる平均地盤面からの高さのうちから地方公共団体が当該区域の土地利用の状況等を勘案して条例で指定するもの）の水平面（対象区域外の部分、高層住居誘導地区内の部分、都市再生特別地区内の部分及び当該建築物の敷地内の部分を除く。）に、敷地境界線からの水平距離が五メートルを超える範囲において、同表（に）欄の（一）、（二）又は（三）の号（同表の三の項にあつては、（一）又は（二）の号）のうちから地方公共団体がその地方の気候及び風土、土地利用の状況等を勘案して条例で指定する号に掲げる時間以上日影となる部分を生じさせることのないものとしなければならない。ただし、特定行政庁が土地の状況等により周囲の居住環境を害するおそれがないと認めて建築審査会の同意を得て許可した場合又は当該許可を受けた建築物を周囲の居住環境を害するおそれがないものとして政令で定める位置及び規模の範囲内において増築し、改築し、若しくは移転する場合においては、この限りでない。
Article 56-2  (1) Buildings set forth in those rows of column (b) of Appended Table 4 (in the row (4), from among (a) or (b) of that paragraph, that which the local government has designated by ordinances taking into consideration the climate, and natural features of the region concerned and circumstances of land use in the relevant area) in areas which are the entire or a part of any district or area set forth in those rows of column (a) of that Table and are designated by ordinances of the local government (hereinafter in this Article set forth as "target areas") shall, during the time from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. (in areas of Hokkaido, from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m.) by true solar time on the day of winter solstice, not shade any area for that hours or more as shown in item (i), (ii) or (iii) of column (d) of that Table (as for row (3) of that Table, item (i) or (ii)) to be designated by ordinances of the local government, taking into consideration the climate and natural features of the region concerned, and circumstances of land use, etc., in an area exceeding 5 meters in horizontal distance from the boundary line of the site, on a level plane at a height from average ground level (in rows (2) and (3), of the heights from the average ground level set forth in the relevant each row, those designated by the local government under ordinances taking into consideration the circumstances of land use in the relevant area) (excluding the part outside target areas, High-rise residential Attraction Districts, Special Districts for Urban Renaissances, and the part in the site of the relevant building) set forth in those rows of column (c) of that Table (in row (4), (a) or (b) of that row). Provided, however, this shall not apply when the Designated Administrative Agency has granted permission after concluding that there is no likely detriment to the surrounding residential environment in view of the land conditions, etc., upon obtaining the consent of the Building Review Council or if the relevant building for which permission has been granted is to be added, rebuilt or relocated in accordance with a position and a scale specified by Cabinet Order as that which will not likely be detrimental to the residential environment in the surrounding areas.
２　同一の敷地内に二以上の建築物がある場合においては、これらの建築物を一の建築物とみなして、前項の規定を適用する。
(2) If there are two or more buildings on the same site, buildings shall be regarded as one building in applying the provision of the preceding paragraph.
３　建築物の敷地が道路、川又は海その他これらに類するものに接する場合、建築物の敷地とこれに接する隣地との高低差が著しい場合その他これらに類する特別の事情がある場合における第一項本文の規定の適用の緩和に関する措置は、政令で定める。
(3) Measures for relaxing the provisions referred to in the main clause of paragraph (1) shall be specified by Cabinet Order for cases where the site of a building abuts on a road, river, sea or the like, where unevenness between the site of a building and the adjacent land lot is extreme, or where there is some other special circumstance similar thereto.
４　対象区域外にある高さが十メートルを超える建築物で、冬至日において、対象区域内の土地に日影を生じさせるものは、当該対象区域内にある建築物とみなして、第一項の規定を適用する。
(4) Buildings exceeding 10 meters in height located outside target areas which shade land in target areas on the day of the winter solstice shall be considered to be located inside the target area concerned, and shall be subject to the provisions of paragraph (1).
５　建築物が第一項の規定による日影時間の制限の異なる区域の内外にわたる場合又は建築物が、冬至日において、対象区域のうち当該建築物がある区域外の土地に日影を生じさせる場合における同項の規定の適用に関し必要な事項は、政令で定める。
(5) If buildings extend into areas with different restrictions regarding shadow hours under paragraph (1), or where buildings in target areas shade land in other target areas on the day of the winter solstice, necessary items concerning application of the provisions referred to in that paragraph shall be specified by Cabinet Order.
（高架の工作物内に設ける建築物等に対する高さの制限の緩和）
(Relaxation of Restriction on Height of Buildings to be Erected on Elevated Structures)
第五十七条　高架の工作物内に設ける建築物で特定行政庁が周囲の状況により交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めるものについては、前三条の規定は、適用しない。
Article 57  (1) With respect to buildings to be erected on elevated structures, the provisions of the preceding three Articles shall not apply if the Designated Administrative Agency concludes that there is no objection from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire prevention, and sanitation due to surrounding conditions.
２　道路内にある建築物（高架の道路の路面下に設けるものを除く。）については、第五十六条第一項第一号及び第二項から第四項までの規定は、適用しない。
(2) With respect to buildings (excluding those erected under elevated roads) on roads, the provisions of Article 56 paragraph (1), item (i) and paragraphs (2) through (4) shall not apply.
（特例容積率適用地区内における建築物の容積率の特例）
(Special Rules for the Floor Area Ratio in a Building in Exceptional Floor Area Ratio Districts)
第五十七条の二　特例容積率適用地区内の二以上の敷地（建築物の敷地となるべき土地及び当該特例容積率適用地区の内外にわたる敷地であつてその過半が当該特例容積率適用地区に属するものを含む。以下この項において同じ。）に係る土地について所有権若しくは建築物の所有を目的とする地上権若しくは賃借権（臨時設備その他一時使用のため設定されたことが明らかなものを除く。以下「借地権」という。）を有する者又はこれらの者の同意を得た者は、一人で、又は数人が共同して、特定行政庁に対し、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、当該二以上の敷地（以下この条及び次条において「特例敷地」という。）のそれぞれに適用される特別の容積率（以下この条及び第六十条の二第四項において「特例容積率」という。）の限度の指定を申請することができる。
Article 57-2  (1) Parties with ownership rights, either superficies or leases to own buildings (excluding cases where it is clearly established for temporary equipment or other temporary use. hereinafter referred to as "leasehold") or persons to get their consents, of two or more building lots in Exceptional Floor Area Ratio Districts (including cases where more than half of land that must be the site of the building or of a site that is partly inside and partly outside of the relevant Exceptional Floor Area Ratio Districts is part of the relevant Exceptional Floor Area Ratio Districts; the same in this paragraph), shall apply, either individually or jointly, to the Designated Administrative Agency for designation of a limit of special floor area ratio (hereinafter in this Article and in Article 60-2, paragraph (4), referred to as "Special Floor Area Ratio") on each of these two or more sites (hereinafter in this Article and the following Article referred to as "Special Sites"), according to the stipulations by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
２　前項の規定による申請をしようとする者は、申請者及び同項の規定による同意をした者以外に当該申請に係る特例敷地について政令で定める利害関係を有する者があるときは、あらかじめ、これらの者の同意を得なければならない。
(2) Parties intending to make the application under the preceding paragraph must be required to get, in advance, the consent of other interested parties in the Special Sites to be applied, according to Cabinet Order, than the applicants nor the one who give the consents under the preceding paragraph.
３　特定行政庁は、第一項の規定による申請が次の各号に掲げる要件のいずれにも該当すると認めるときは、当該申請に基づき、特例敷地のそれぞれに適用される特例容積率の限度を指定するものとする。
(3) If the Designated Administrative Agency finds that the application under paragraph (1) falls under any of the requirements set forth in the following items, it designates a limit of the special floor area ratios to each special sites, based on the relevant application.
一　申請に係るそれぞれの特例敷地の敷地面積に申請に係るそれぞれの特例容積率の限度を乗じて得た数値の合計が、当該それぞれの特例敷地の敷地面積に第五十二条第一項各号（第五号から第七号までを除く。以下この号において同じ。）の規定によるそれぞれの建築物の容積率（当該特例敷地について現に次項の規定により特例容積率の限度が公告されているときは、当該特例容積率。以下この号において「基準容積率」という。）の限度を乗じて得た数値の合計以下であること。この場合において、当該それぞれの特例敷地が基準容積率に関する制限を受ける地域又は区域の二以上にわたるときの当該基準容積率の限度は、同条第一項各号の規定による当該各地域又は区域内の建築物の容積率の限度にその特例敷地の当該地域又は区域内にある各部分の面積の敷地面積に対する割合を乗じて得たものの合計とする。
(i) the total of the values obtained by multiplying the site areas of each Special Sites related to the application by the limits of the Special Floor Area Ratios related to the application shall be equal to or less than the total of the values obtained by multiplying the site area of each of the relevant Special Sites by the limit of the floor area ratio (when the limit on the Special Floor Area Ratios related to the relevant Special Sites has already been public noticed pursuant to the following paragraph, the relevant Special Floor Area Ratios; hereinafter in this item referred to as "standard floor area ratio") of each building under the provisions of each item (excluding items (v) through (vii); the same in this item) of Article 52, paragraph (1). In this case, the limit of the relevant standard floor area ratio when one of the relevant Special Sites is located in two or more districts or areas subject to restrictions on the standard floor area ratio shall be the total obtained by multiplying the limit on the floor area ratio of the building inside the relevant district or area under each item of paragraph (1) of that Article by the ratio of the area of the site that is the area of each part of the surface area of the Special Site that is within each of the relevant districts or areas;
二　申請に係るそれぞれの特例容積率の限度が、申請に係るそれぞれの特例敷地内に現に存する建築物の容積率又は現に建築の工事中の建築物の計画上の容積率以上であること。
(ii) the limits of the Special Floor Area Ratios related to the application shall be equal to or higher than the floor area ratios of the buildings already in the corresponding Special Sites related to the application or the floor area ratios in the plans for the buildings already under construction;
三　申請に係るそれぞれの特例容積率の限度が、申請に係るそれぞれの特例敷地における建築物の利用上の必要性、周囲の状況等を考慮して、当該それぞれの特例敷地にふさわしい容積を備えた建築物が建築されることにより当該それぞれの特例敷地の土地が適正かつ合理的な利用形態となるよう定められていること。この場合において、申請に係る特例容積率の限度のうち第五十二条第一項及び第三項から第八項までの規定による限度を超えるものにあつては、当該特例容積率の限度に適合して建築される建築物が交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないものとなるよう定められていること。
(iii) the limit of each Special Floor Area Ratios related to the application shall be set, accounting for the necessity to use the building on each of the Special Sites related to the application and surrounding conditions, so that by constructing buildings with capacity suited to each of the relevant Special Sites, the land on each of the relevant Special Sites is used appropriately and rationally. In this case, those of the limits of the Special Floor Area Ratios related to the application which exceed the limit under Article 52, paragraph (1) and paragraphs (3) through (8) shall be set so that a building constructed in compliance with the relevant limit of the Special Floor Area Ratio shall not be detrimental for traffic, safety, fire prevention, and sanitation.
４　特定行政庁は、前項の規定による指定をしたときは、遅滞なく、特例容積率の限度、特例敷地の位置その他国土交通省令で定める事項を公告するとともに、国土交通省令で定める事項を表示した図書をその事務所に備えて、一般の縦覧に供さなければならない。
(4) When the Designated Administrative Agency designates limits under the preceding paragraph, it must immediately give public notice of the limits of the Special Floor Area Ratios, the locations of the Special Sites, and other matters specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, and shall also provide drawings and documents showing matters specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order in its office and make them available for public inspection.
５　第三項の規定による指定は、前項の規定による公告によつて、その効力を生ずる。
(5) A designation under paragraph (3) shall come into effect by means of the public notice under the preceding paragraph.
６　第四項の規定により特例容積率の限度が公告されたときは、当該特例敷地内の建築物については、当該特例容積率の限度を第五十二条第一項各号に掲げる数値とみなして、同条の規定を適用する。
(6) When the limits of the Special Floor Area Ratios have been public noticed pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (4), the limits of the relevant Special Floor Area Ratios shall be regarded as the values r set forth in Article 52, each item of paragraph (1) and the provisions of that Article shall be applied to buildings on the relevant Special Sites.
７　第四項の規定により公告された特例敷地のいずれかについて第一項の規定による申請があつた場合において、特定行政庁が当該申請に係る第三項の指定（以下この項において「新規指定」という。）をしたときは、当該特例敷地についての第三項の規定による従前の指定は、新規指定に係る第四項の規定による公告があつた日から将来に向かつて、その効力を失う。
(7) When the Designated Administrative Agency has, in a case where there is an application under paragraph (1) concerning one of the Special Sites that has been public noticed pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (4), performed the designation under paragraph (3) related to the relevant application (hereinafter in this paragraph referred to as "new designation"), the previous designation based on the provisions of paragraph (3) concerning the relevant Special Site shall cease to be effective and remain invalid on the day of the public announcement of the new designation under paragraph (4).
（指定の取消し）
(Revocation of a designation)
第五十七条の三　前条第四項の規定により公告された特例敷地である土地について所有権又は借地権を有する者は、その全員の合意により、同条第三項の指定の取消しを特定行政庁に申請することができる。この場合においては、あらかじめ、当該特例敷地について政令で定める利害関係を有する者の同意を得なければならない。
Article 57-3  (1) Parties with ownership rights or leasehold to the land with public notices of Special Sites pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (4) of the preceding Article shall, with unanimous agreement by all the parties, apply to the Designated Administrative Agency for cancellation of the relevant designation under paragraph (3) of that Article. In this case, the agreement of parties with interest specified by Cabinet Order concerning the relevant Special Sites must be obtained in advance.
２　前項の規定による申請を受けた特定行政庁は、当該申請に係るそれぞれの特例敷地内に現に存する建築物の容積率又は現に建築の工事中の建築物の計画上の容積率が第五十二条第一項から第九項までの規定による限度以下であるとき、その他当該建築物の構造が交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めるときは、当該申請に係る指定を取り消すものとする。
(2) If the floor area ratios of buildings already on the respective special site or the planned floor area ratios of the buildings currently under construction related to the relevant application are below the limit under Article 52, paragraphs (1) through (9), and if the Designated Administrative Agency finds that the structures of the relevant buildings are not detrimental for traffic, safety, fire prevention, and sanitation, it revokes the designation related to the relevant application.
３　特定行政庁は、前項の規定による取消しをしたときは、遅滞なく、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、その旨を公告しなければならない。
(3) When a Designated Administrative Agency cancels the application under the preceding paragraph, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, it must immediately publicly notify to that effect.
４　第二項の規定による取消しは、前項の規定による公告によつて、その効力を生ずる。
(4) The cancellation under paragraph (2) shall come into effect when it is public noticed under the preceding paragraph.
５　前二項に定めるもののほか、第二項の規定による指定の取消しについて必要な事項は、国土交通省令で定める。
(5) In addition to the provisions of the preceding two paragraphs, matters necessary concerning the cancellation of the designation under paragraph (2) shall be specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（特例容積率適用地区内における建築物の高さの限度）
(Limit on the Height of a Building in Exceptional Floor Area Ratio Districts)
第五十七条の四　特例容積率適用地区内においては、建築物の高さは、特例容積率適用地区に関する都市計画において建築物の高さの最高限度が定められたときは、当該最高限度以下でなければならない。ただし、特定行政庁が用途上又は構造上やむを得ないと認めて許可したものについては、この限りでない。
Article 57-4  (1) In Exceptional Floor Area Ratio Districts, when the maximum height of buildings is specified in a city planning for Exceptional Floor Area Ratio District must be equal to or lower than the relevant maximum limit. Provided, however, that this shall not apply for those of which the Designated Administrative Agency has found that there is unavoidable because the use or the structure and granted permission.
２　第四十四条第二項の規定は、前項ただし書の規定による許可をする場合に準用する。
(2) The provisions of Article 44, paragraph (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the approval under the proviso in the preceding paragraph.
（高層住居誘導地区）
(High-rise residential Attraction Districts)
第五十七条の五　高層住居誘導地区内においては、建築物の建蔽率は、高層住居誘導地区に関する都市計画において建築物の建蔽率の最高限度が定められたときは、当該最高限度以下でなければならない。
Article 57-5  (1) In High-rise residential Attraction Districts, when the maximum building coverage ratio is specified in a city planning for High-rise residential Attraction Districts, the building coverage ratio of buildings must be equal to or lower than the relevant maximum in must be equal to or lower than the maximum limit.
２　前項の場合において、建築物の敷地が高層住居誘導地区の内外にわたるときは、当該高層住居誘導地区に関する都市計画において定められた建築物の建蔽率の最高限度を、当該建築物の当該高層住居誘導地区内にある部分に係る第五十三条第一項の規定による建築物の建蔽率の限度とみなして、同条第二項の規定を適用する。
(2) When the building site extends inside and outside High-rise residential Attraction Districts under the case of the preceding paragraph, the upper limit of the building coverage ratio specified in city planning for the relevant High-rise residential Attraction Districts shall be considered to be the limit on the building coverage ratio in the districts concerned under Article 53, paragraph (1), and the provisions of paragraph (2) of that Article shall be applied.
３　高層住居誘導地区に関する都市計画において建築物の敷地面積の最低限度が定められた場合については、第五十三条の二（第二項を除く。）の規定を準用する。この場合において、同条第一項中「用途地域」とあるのは、「高層住居誘導地区」と読み替えるものとする。
(3) If a lower limit of the building site area is specified in city planning for High-rise residential Attraction Districts, the provisions of Article 53-2 (excluding paragraph (2)) shall apply mutatis mutandis. In this case, the term, "Use Districts" in paragraph (1) of that Article shall be replaced with "High-rise residential Attraction Districts."
４　高層住居誘導地区内の建築物については、第五十六条の二第一項に規定する対象区域外にある建築物とみなして、同条の規定を適用する。この場合における同条第四項の規定の適用については、同項中「対象区域内の土地」とあるのは、「対象区域（高層住居誘導地区を除く。）内の土地」とする。
(4) A building in High-rise residential Attraction Districts shall be considered to be outside of a target area provided for in Article 56-2, paragraph (1) and the provisions of that Article shall apply. When provisions referred to in paragraph (4) of that Article are applied in this case, the words, "land in the target areas" in that paragraph shall read, "land in the target areas (excluding High-rise residential Attraction Districts)".
（高度地区）
(Height Control Districts)
第五十八条　高度地区内においては、建築物の高さは、高度地区に関する都市計画において定められた内容に適合するものでなければならない。
Article 58  In Height Control Districts, the height of buildings must comply with the conditions specified in city planning for Height Control Districts.
（高度利用地区）
(High-level Use Districts)
第五十九条　高度利用地区内においては、建築物の容積率及び建蔽率並びに建築物の建築面積（同一敷地内に二以上の建築物がある場合においては、それぞれの建築面積）は、高度利用地区に関する都市計画において定められた内容に適合するものでなければならない。ただし、次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物については、この限りでない。
Article 59  (1) In High-level Use Districts, the floor area ratio of a building, the building coverage ratio of a building, and the building area of a building (or the each of building areas if there are two or more buildings on the same site) must be in compliance with the conditions specified in city planning for High-level Use Districts. Provided, however, that this shall not apply to buildings coming under any of the following items:
一　主要構造部が木造、鉄骨造、コンクリートブロック造その他これらに類する構造であつて、階数が二以下で、かつ、地階を有しない建築物で、容易に移転し、又は除却することができるもの
(i) buildings of which principal building parts are of wooden structure, steel structure, concrete block structure or other structure similar thereto, which have two stories or less, and further, have no basement, and can be easily relocated or demolished;
二　公衆便所、巡査派出所その他これらに類する建築物で、公益上必要なもの
(ii) public lavatories, police boxes, or other buildings similar thereto which are necessary for the public interest;
三　学校、駅舎、卸売市場その他これらに類する公益上必要な建築物で、特定行政庁が用途上又は構造上やむを得ないと認めて許可したもの
(iii) schools, station buildings, wholesale markets, or other similar buildings that are necessary for the public good and have been found that there is unavoidable because the use or the structure, and granted permission by the Designated Administrative Agency.
２　高度利用地区内においては、建築物の壁又はこれに代わる柱は、建築物の地盤面下の部分及び国土交通大臣が指定する歩廊の柱その他これに類するものを除き、高度利用地区に関する都市計画において定められた壁面の位置の制限に反して建築してはならない。ただし、前項各号の一に該当する建築物については、この限りでない。
(2) In High-level Use Districts, walls of buildings or columns that replaces the walls must not be erected in violation of restrictions on the location of wall surfaces as specified in city planning for High-level Use Districts, except for the parts of buildings below ground level and the columns of promenades or the like as designated by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism. Provided, however, that this shall not apply to buildings coming under any item of the preceding paragraph.
３　高度利用地区内の建築物については、当該高度利用地区に関する都市計画において定められた建築物の容積率の最高限度を第五十二条第一項各号に掲げる数値とみなして、同条の規定を適用する。
(3) With respect to buildings in High-level Use Districts, the upper limit of the floor area ratio of a building as specified in city planning for the relevant High-level Use District shall be regarded as the value set forth in each item of Article 52, paragraph (1) and the provisions of that Article shall apply.
４　高度利用地区内においては、敷地内に道路に接して有効な空地が確保されていること等により、特定行政庁が、交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めて許可した建築物については、第五十六条第一項第一号及び第二項から第四項までの規定は、適用しない。
(4) In High-level Use Districts, the provisions of Article 56, paragraph (1), item (i) and paragraphs (2) through (4) shall not apply to buildings which the Designated Administrative Agency has permitted after concluding that there is no objection from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire prevention, and sanitation, due to the fact that the site concerned has effective open space abutting on a road or for other reasons.
５　第四十四条第二項の規定は、第一項第三号又は前項の規定による許可をする場合に準用する。
(5) The provisions of Article 44, paragraph (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis when permission is granted under paragraph (1), item (iii) or the preceding paragraph.
（敷地内に広い空地を有する建築物の容積率等の特例）
(Special Rules regarding the Floor Area Ratio of Buildings with Large Open Space on Their Sites)
第五十九条の二　その敷地内に政令で定める空地を有し、かつ、その敷地面積が政令で定める規模以上である建築物で、特定行政庁が交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がなく、かつ、その建蔽率、容積率及び各部分の高さについて総合的な配慮がなされていることにより市街地の環境の整備改善に資すると認めて許可したものの容積率又は各部分の高さは、その許可の範囲内において、第五十二条第一項から第九項まで、第五十五条第一項、第五十六条又は第五十七条の二第六項の規定による限度を超えるものとすることができる。
Article 59-2  (1) With respect to buildings having open space on their sites as specified by Cabinet Order and having site area of at least the scale specified by Cabinet Order, which the Designated Administrative Agency has permitted, after concluding that there is no objection from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire prevention, and sanitation, and further, that those buildings contribute to the adjustment and improvement of the environment of the urban area concerned as a result of comprehensive consideration given to the building coverage ratio, the floor area ratio, and the height of each part, the floor area ratio of a building or the height of each part thereof may exceed the limits under Article 52, paragraphs (1) through (9); Article 55, paragraph (1); Article 56; or Article 57-2, paragraph (6) within the scope of the permission.
２　第四十四条第二項の規定は、前項の規定による許可をする場合に準用する。
(2) The provision of Article 44, paragraph (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis when permission is granted under the preceding paragraph.
（特定街区）
(Specified Blocks)
第六十条　特定街区内においては、建築物の容積率及び高さは、特定街区に関する都市計画において定められた限度以下でなければならない。
Article 60  (1) In Specified Blocks, the floor area ratio of a building and the height of a building must not exceed the limits specified in city planning for Specified Blocks.
２　特定街区内においては、建築物の壁又はこれに代わる柱は、建築物の地盤面下の部分及び国土交通大臣が指定する歩廊の柱その他これに類するものを除き、特定街区に関する都市計画において定められた壁面の位置の制限に反して建築してはならない。
(2) In Specified Blocks, walls of buildings or columns that replaces the relevant walls must not be erected in violation of restrictions on the location of wall surfaces as specified in city planning for Specified Blocks, except for the parts of buildings below the ground level and the columns of promenades or the like as designated by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism.
３　特定街区内の建築物については、第五十二条から前条まで並びに第六十条の三第一項及び第二項の規定は、適用しない。
(3) The provisions of Article 52 through the preceding Article, and Article 60-3, paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall not apply to buildings in Specified Blocks.
第四節の二　都市再生特別地区、居住環境向上用途誘導地区及び特定用途誘導地区
Section 4-2 Special Districts for Urban Renaissance, Guided Land Use Districts for Residential Environment Improvement and Special Use Attraction Districts
（都市再生特別地区）
(Special Districts for Urban Renaissance)
第六十条の二　都市再生特別地区内においては、建築物の容積率及び建蔽率、建築物の建築面積（同一敷地内に二以上の建築物がある場合においては、それぞれの建築面積）並びに建築物の高さは、都市再生特別地区に関する都市計画において定められた内容に適合するものでなければならない。ただし、次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物については、この限りでない。
Article 60-2  (1) In Special Districts for Urban Renaissance the floor area ratio of a building, the building coverage ratio of a building, the building area of a building (or the each of building areas if there are two or more buildings on the same site) and the height of a building must be in compliance with the conditions specified in city planning for Special Districts for Urban Renaissance. Provided, however, that this shall not apply to buildings coming under any of the following items:
一　主要構造部が木造、鉄骨造、コンクリートブロック造その他これらに類する構造であつて、階数が二以下で、かつ、地階を有しない建築物で、容易に移転し、又は除却することができるもの
(i) buildings of which principal building parts are of wooden structure, steel structure, concrete block structure or other structure similar thereto, which have two stories or less, and further, have no basement, and can be easily relocated or demolished;
二　公衆便所、巡査派出所その他これらに類する建築物で、公益上必要なもの
(ii) public lavatories, police boxes, or other buildings similar thereto which are necessary for the public interest;
三　学校、駅舎、卸売市場その他これらに類する公益上必要な建築物で、特定行政庁が用途上又は構造上やむを得ないと認めて許可したもの
(iii) schools, station buildings, wholesale markets, or other similar buildings that are necessary for the public good and have been found that there is unavoidable because the use or the structure, and granted permission by the Designated Administrative Agency.
２　都市再生特別地区内においては、建築物の壁又はこれに代わる柱は、建築物の地盤面下の部分及び国土交通大臣が指定する歩廊の柱その他これに類するものを除き、都市再生特別地区に関する都市計画において定められた壁面の位置の制限に反して建築してはならない。ただし、前項各号のいずれかに該当する建築物については、この限りでない。
(2) In Special Districts for Urban Renaissance, walls or columns that replaces the relevant walls must not be erected in violation of restrictions on the location of wall surfaces as specified in city planning for Special Districts for Urban Renaissance, except for the parts of buildings below ground level and the columns of promenades or the like as designated by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism. Provided, however, that this shall not apply to buildings coming under any item of the preceding paragraph.
３　都市再生特別地区に関する都市計画において定められた誘導すべき用途に供する建築物については、第四十八条から第四十九条の二までの規定は、適用しない。
(3) The provisions of Articles 48 through 49-2 shall not apply to buildings provided for uses that should be guided specified by city planning for Special Districts for Urban Renaissance.
４　都市再生特別地区内の建築物については、当該都市再生特別地区に関する都市計画において定められた建築物の容積率の最高限度を第五十二条第一項各号に掲げる数値（第五十七条の二第六項の規定により当該数値とみなされる特例容積率の限度の数値を含む。）とみなして、第五十二条の規定を適用する。
(4) With respect to buildings in Special Districts for Urban Renaissance, the upper limit of the floor area ratio of the buildings shall be regarded as the value designated in city planning for the relevant Special Districts for Urban Renaissance, set forth in each item of Article 52, paragraph (1) (including the value of the limit on the special floor area ratio that is considered to be the relevant value pursuant to the provisions of Article 57-2, paragraph (6)).
５　都市再生特別地区内の建築物については、第五十六条、第五十七条の四、第五十八条及び第六十条の三第二項の規定は、適用しない。
(5) The provisions of Article 56, Article 57-4, Article 58 and Article 60-3, Paragraph (2) shall not apply to buildings in Special Districts for Urban Renaissance
６　都市再生特別地区内の建築物については、第五十六条の二第一項に規定する対象区域外にある建築物とみなして、同条の規定を適用する。この場合における同条第四項の規定の適用については、同項中「対象区域内の土地」とあるのは、「対象区域（都市再生特別地区を除く。）内の土地」とする。
(6) A building in Special Districts for Urban Renaissance shall be considered to be outside of a target area provided for in Article 56-2, paragraph (1) and the provisions of that Article shall apply. When provisions referred to in paragraph (4) of that Article are applied in this case, the words "land in the target areas" in that paragraph shall read, "land in the target areas (excluding Special Districts for Urban Renaissance)."
７　第四十四条第二項の規定は、第一項第三号の規定による許可をする場合に準用する。
(7) The provisions of Article 44, paragraph (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis when permission is granted under paragraph (1), item (iii).
（居住環境向上用途誘導地区）
(Guided Land Use District for Residential Environment Improvement)
第六十条の二の二　居住環境向上用途誘導地区内においては、建築物の建蔽率は、居住環境向上用途誘導地区に関する都市計画において建築物の建蔽率の最高限度が定められたときは、当該最高限度以下でなければならない。ただし、次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物については、この限りでない。
Article 60-2-2  (1) In Land Use Guiding Districts for Residential Environment Improvement, when the maximum building coverage ratio is specified in a City Planning for Land Use Guiding Districts for Residential Environment Improvement, the building coverage ratio of buildings must be equal to or lower than the relevant maximum in must be equal to or lower than the maximum limit. Provided, however, this shall not apply to buildings coming under any of the following items:
一　公衆便所、巡査派出所その他これらに類する建築物で、公益上必要なもの
(i) public toilets, police boxes or other buildings similar thereto that are necessary for the public interest;
二　学校、駅舎、卸売市場その他これらに類する公益上必要な建築物で、特定行政庁が用途上又は構造上やむを得ないと認めて許可したもの
(ii) schools, station buildings, wholesale markets, or other similar buildings that are necessary for the public good and have been found that there is unavoidable because the use or the structure, and granted permission by the Designated Administrative Agency.
２　居住環境向上用途誘導地区内においては、建築物の壁又はこれに代わる柱は、居住環境向上用途誘導地区に関する都市計画において壁面の位置の制限が定められたときは、建築物の地盤面下の部分及び国土交通大臣が指定する歩廊の柱その他これに類するものを除き、当該壁面の位置の制限に反して建築してはならない。ただし、前項各号のいずれかに該当する建築物については、この限りでない。
(2) In Land Use Guiding Districts for Residential Environment Improvement, the walls of a building or columns that substitute for walls shall, when restrictions on the position of the wall surface have been specified in city planning for Land Use Guiding Districts for Residential Environment Improvement, be built in accordance with the relevant restrictions on the position of the wall surface, excluding the parts below ground level and the columns of promenades or parts similar thereto as designated by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism. Provided, however, this shall not apply to buildings coming under any of the items in the preceding paragraph.
３　居住環境向上用途誘導地区内においては、建築物の高さは、居住環境向上用途誘導地区に関する都市計画において建築物の高さの最高限度が定められたときは、当該最高限度以下でなければならない。ただし、特定行政庁が用途上又は構造上やむを得ないと認めて許可したものについては、この限りでない。
(3) In Land Use Guiding Districts for Residential Environment Improvement, when the maximum height of buildings is specified in a city planning for Land Use Guiding Districts for Residential Environment Improvement must be equal to or lower than the relevant maximum limit. Provided, however, that this shall not apply for those of which the Designated Administrative Agency has found that there is unavoidable because the use or the structure and granted permission.
４　居住環境向上用途誘導地区内においては、地方公共団体は、その地区の指定の目的のために必要と認める場合においては、国土交通大臣の承認を得て、条例で、第四十八条第一項から第十三項までの規定による制限を緩和することができる。
(4) In Land Use Guiding Districts for Residential Environment Improvement, a local government may relax the restrictions under Article 48, Paragraphs (1) through (13), when the organization deems it necessary to do so for the purpose of designation in the relevant district by establishing an ordinance, after having obtained approval thereof from the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism.
５　第四十四条第二項の規定は、第一項第二号又は第三項ただし書の規定による許可をする場合に準用する。
(5) The provisions of Article 44, paragraph (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis when permission is granted under the provision of paragraph (1), item (ii) or under the proviso in paragraph (3).
（特定用途誘導地区）
(Special Use Attraction District)
第六十条の三　特定用途誘導地区内においては、建築物の容積率及び建築物の建築面積（同一敷地内に二以上の建築物がある場合においては、それぞれの建築面積）は、特定用途誘導地区に関する都市計画において建築物の容積率の最低限度及び建築物の建築面積の最低限度が定められたときは、それぞれ、これらの最低限度以上でなければならない。ただし、次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物については、この限りでない。
Article 60-3  (1) In Special Use Attraction Districts, when the minimum floor area ratio and minimum building area (if there are two or more buildings within the same site, the building areas of each of those buildings) of buildings are specified in city planning for Special Use Attraction Districts, these must be higher than the relevant minimum limit. Provided, however, that these requirements shall not apply to buildings coming under any of the following items.
一　主要構造部が木造、鉄骨造、コンクリートブロック造その他これらに類する構造であつて、階数が二以下で、かつ、地階を有しない建築物で、容易に移転し、又は除却することができるもの
(i) buildings with principal structural parts made of wood, steel frames, concrete blocks, or other similar structures, which have two or fewer floors, and which have no basements and can easily be relocated or removed;
二　公衆便所、巡査派出所その他これらに類する建築物で、公益上必要なもの
(ii) public lavatories, police boxes, or other similar buildings that are necessary for the public good;
三　学校、駅舎、卸売市場その他これらに類する公益上必要な建築物で、特定行政庁が用途上又は構造上やむを得ないと認めて許可したもの
(iii) schools, station buildings, wholesale markets, or other similar buildings that are necessary for the public good and have been found that there is unavoidable because the use or the structure, and granted permission by the Designated Administrative Agency.
２　特定用途誘導地区内においては、建築物の高さは、特定用途誘導地区に関する都市計画において建築物の高さの最高限度が定められたときは、当該最高限度以下でなければならない。ただし、特定行政庁が用途上又は構造上やむを得ないと認めて許可したものについては、この限りでない。
(2) In Special Use Attraction Districts, when the maximum height of buildings is specified in city planning for Special Use Attraction Districts, the height of the buildings must be equal to or lower than the relevant maximum height. Provided, however, that this shall not apply for those of which the Designated Administrative Agency has found that there is unavoidable because the use or the structure and granted permission.
３　特定用途誘導地区内においては、地方公共団体は、その地区の指定の目的のために必要と認める場合においては、国土交通大臣の承認を得て、条例で、第四十八条第一項から第十三項までの規定による制限を緩和することができる。
(3) In Special Use Attraction Districts, a local government may relax the restrictions under t Article 48, paragraphs (1) through (13) with the approval of the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism under an ordinance, when the local government has recognized that it is necessary to do so for the designated purpose of the district.
４　第四十四条第二項の規定は、第一項第三号又は第二項ただし書の規定による許可をする場合に準用する。
(4) The provisions of Article 44, paragraph (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis when permission is granted under paragraph (1), item (iii) or the proviso of paragraph (2).
第五節　防火地域及び準防火地域
Section 5 Fire Prevention Districts and Quasi-fire Prevention Districts
（防火地域及び準防火地域内の建築物）
(Buildings in Fire Prevention Districts and Quasi-fire Prevention Districts)
第六十一条　防火地域又は準防火地域内にある建築物は、その外壁の開口部で延焼のおそれのある部分に防火戸その他の政令で定める防火設備を設け、かつ、壁、柱、床その他の建築物の部分及び当該防火設備を通常の火災による周囲への延焼を防止するためにこれらに必要とされる性能に関して防火地域及び準防火地域の別並びに建築物の規模に応じて政令で定める技術的基準に適合するもので、国土交通大臣が定めた構造方法を用いるもの又は国土交通大臣の認定を受けたものとしなければならない。ただし、門又は塀で、高さ二メートル以下のもの又は準防火地域内にある建築物（木造建築物等を除く。）に附属するものについては、この限りでない。
Article 61  Buildings in Fire Prevention Districts or Quasi-fire Prevention Districts shall have opening protective assemblies that are specified by Cabinet Order, such as fire doors in their openings in exterior walls that are the parts liable to catch fire. Building parts such as walls, columns and floors and the relevant opening protective assemblies must conform to the technical criteria established by Cabinet Order according to the classification of Fire Prevention Districts and Quasi-fire Prevention Districts concerning the performance required for those parts and assembly in order to prevent the spread of fire to the surrounding areas resulting from a normal fire, and which use the construction methods established by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or which were approved by the Minister. Provided, however, that this shall not apply to gates or fences of 2 meters or less in height or those attached to buildings (excluding wooden buildings, etc.) located in Quasi-fire Prevention Districts.
（屋根）
(Roofs)
第六十二条　防火地域又は準防火地域内の建築物の屋根の構造は、市街地における火災を想定した火の粉による建築物の火災の発生を防止するために屋根に必要とされる性能に関して建築物の構造及び用途の区分に応じて政令で定める技術的基準に適合するもので、国土交通大臣が定めた構造方法を用いるもの又は国土交通大臣の認定を受けたものとしなければならない。
Article 62  The construction of roofs of buildings in Fire Prevention Districts or Quasi-fire Prevention Districts must conform to technical criteria established by Cabinet Order according to the construction methods and category of use of the building concerning the performance necessary for a roof to prevent the occurrence of a fire in the building caused by burning brands assumed to accompany a fire in urban areas, and which uses construction methods established by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or which was approved by the Minister.
（隣地境界線に接する外壁）
(Exterior Walls Abutting on Boundary Lines with Adjacent Land Lots)
第六十三条　防火地域又は準防火地域内にある建築物で、外壁が耐火構造のものについては、その外壁を隣地境界線に接して設けることができる。
Article 63  With respect to buildings which are located in Fire Prevention Districts or Quasi-fire Prevention Districts and of which exterior walls are of fire-resistive construction, those exterior walls may abut on the boundary lines with adjacent land lots.
（看板等の防火措置）
(Fire Preventive Measures for Sign Boards)
第六十四条　防火地域内にある看板、広告塔、装飾塔その他これらに類する工作物で、建築物の屋上に設けるもの又は高さ三メートルを超えるものは、その主要な部分を不燃材料で造り、又は覆わなければならない。
Article 64  With respect to sign boards, advertisement towers, decoration towers and other structures similar thereto which are located in Fire Prevention Districts, and which are constructed on the roofs of buildings or exceed 3 meters in height, the main part thereof must be made of or covered with noncombustible materials.
（建築物が防火地域又は準防火地域の内外にわたる場合の措置）
(Measures for Buildings Extending Outside Fire Prevention Districts or Quasi-fire Prevention Districts)
第六十五条　建築物が防火地域又は準防火地域とこれらの地域として指定されていない区域にわたる場合においては、その全部についてそれぞれ防火地域又は準防火地域内の建築物に関する規定を適用する。ただし、その建築物が防火地域又は準防火地域外において防火壁で区画されている場合においては、その防火壁外の部分については、この限りでない。
Article 65  (1) If a building extends outside a Fire Prevention District or a Quasi-fire Prevention District into an area not designated as either district, the provisions applicable to buildings within Fire Prevention Districts or Quasi-fire Prevention Districts, as the case may be, shall apply to the entire building. Provided, however, that if the building is separated by fire walls outside the Fire Prevention Districts or Quasi-fire Prevention Districts, this shall not apply to the part outside the fire walls.
２　建築物が防火地域及び準防火地域にわたる場合においては、その全部について防火地域内の建築物に関する規定を適用する。ただし、建築物が防火地域外において防火壁で区画されている場合においては、その防火壁外の部分については、準防火地域内の建築物に関する規定を適用する。
(2) If a building lies partly in a Fire Prevention District and partly in a Quasi-fire Prevention District, the provisions applicable to buildings within Fire Prevention Districts shall apply to the entire building. Provided, however, that if the building is separated by fire walls outside the Fire Prevention Districts, the provisions applicable to buildings within Quasi-fire Prevention Districts shall apply to the part outside the fire walls.
（第三十八条の準用）
(Application of Article 38 Mutatis Mutandis)
第六十六条　第三十八条の規定は、その予想しない特殊の構造方法又は建築材料を用いる建築物に対するこの節の規定及びこれに基づく命令の規定の適用について準用する。
Article 66  The provisions of Article 38 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the provisions referred to in this Section and any orders based upon those provisions, in relation to buildings in which unforeseen special structural methods and construction materials are used.
第五節の二　特定防災街区整備地区
Section 5-2 Specified Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone
（特定防災街区整備地区）
(Specified Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone)
第六十七条　特定防災街区整備地区内にある建築物は、耐火建築物等又は準耐火建築物等としなければならない。ただし、次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物については、この限りでない。
Article 67  (1) A building in a Specified Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone must be a fireproof building or a quasi fire-proof building. Provided, however, that this shall not apply in buildings coming under any of the following items.
一　延べ面積が五十平方メートル以内の平家建ての附属建築物で、外壁及び軒裏が防火構造のもの
(i) one-story annex building with total floor area of 50 square meters or less, of which exterior walls and soffits are fire preventive construction;
二　卸売市場の上家、機械製作工場その他これらと同等以上に火災の発生のおそれが少ない用途に供する建築物で、主要構造部が不燃材料で造られたものその他これに類する構造のもの
(ii) sheds of wholesale markets, machinery manufacturing factories or other buildings of which use involves equal or less danger of outbreak of fire than these buildings, of which principal building parts are made of noncombustible materials and buildings of similar construction thereto;
三　高さ二メートルを超える門又は塀で、不燃材料で造られ、又は覆われたもの
(iii) gates or fences with height in excess of 2 meters, constructed of or covered with noncombustible materials;
四　高さ二メートル以下の門又は塀
(iv) gates or fences of 2 meters or less in height.
２　建築物が特定防災街区整備地区と特定防災街区整備地区として指定されていない区域にわたる場合においては、その全部について、前項の規定を適用する。ただし、その建築物が特定防災街区整備地区外において防火壁で区画されている場合においては、その防火壁外の部分については、この限りでない。
(2) In a case where a building is in both a Specified Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone and in a district that is not designated as a Specified Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone, the provisions of the preceding paragraph shall apply to the entire building. Provided, however, that in a case where this building has a fire wall in out of the Specified Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone, this shall not apply to parts beyond this fire wall.
３　特定防災街区整備地区内においては、建築物の敷地面積は、特定防災街区整備地区に関する都市計画において定められた建築物の敷地面積の最低限度以上でなければならない。ただし、次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物の敷地については、この限りでない。
(3) In a Specified Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone, the area of the site of a building must be equal to or larger than the minimum site area of a building specified by city planning for the Specified Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone. Provided, however, that this shall not apply to the site of a building coming under any of the following items.
一　公衆便所、巡査派出所その他これらに類する建築物で公益上必要なもの
(i) public toilets, police boxes, or other buildings similar thereto necessary for the public interest;
二　特定行政庁が用途上又は構造上やむを得ないと認めて許可したもの
(ii) those of which the Designated Administrative Agency has found that there is unavoidable because the use or the structure and granted permission.
４　第五十三条の二第三項の規定は、前項の都市計画において建築物の敷地面積の最低限度が定められ、又は変更された場合に準用する。この場合において、同条第三項中「第一項」とあるのは、「第六十七条第三項」と読み替えるものとする。
(4) The provisions of Article 53-2, paragraph (3) shall apply mutatis mutandis if the minimum site area of a building in the preceding paragraph has been specified or revised in the city planning. In this case, the term "paragraph (1)" in paragraph (3) of that Article shall be replaced with "Article 67, paragraph (3)".
５　特定防災街区整備地区内においては、建築物の壁又はこれに代わる柱は、特定防災街区整備地区に関する都市計画において壁面の位置の制限が定められたときは、建築物の地盤面下の部分を除き、当該壁面の位置の制限に反して建築してはならない。ただし、次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物については、この限りでない。
(5) In a Specified Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone, when restrictions on the location of walls in city planning for Specified Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone have been designated, walls of buildings or columns that replaces the relevant walls, excluding parts of the building under the ground surface, must not be constructed in violation of the restrictions relevant wall. Provided, however, that this shall not apply to the buildings coming under any of the following items.
一　第三項第一号に掲げる建築物
(i) building set forth in paragraph (3), item (i);
二　学校、駅舎、卸売市場その他これらに類する公益上必要な建築物で、特定行政庁が用途上又は構造上やむを得ないと認めて許可したもの
(ii) schools, station buildings, wholesale markets, or other similar buildings that are necessary for the public good and have been found that there is unavoidable because the use or the structure, and granted permission by the Designated Administrative Agency.
６　特定防災街区整備地区内においては、その敷地が防災都市計画施設（密集市街地整備法第三十一条第二項に規定する防災都市計画施設をいう。以下この条において同じ。）に接する建築物の防災都市計画施設に係る間口率（防災都市計画施設に面する部分の長さの敷地の当該防災都市計画施設に接する部分の長さに対する割合をいう。以下この条において同じ。）及び高さは、特定防災街区整備地区に関する都市計画において建築物の防災都市計画施設に係る間口率の最低限度及び建築物の高さの最低限度が定められたときは、それぞれ、これらの最低限度以上でなければならない。
(6) In a Specified Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone, the frontage ratio (refers to the ratio of the length of the part of the site that faces the Urban Safety Plan Facility (refers to an Urban Safety Plan Facility in Article 31, paragraph (2) of the Concentrated Urban Areas Development Act: same shall apply below in this Article) to the total length of the site) and the height of a building facing to the Areas must be equal to or more than these minimum values, when the minimum frontage ratio of buildings and the minimum height of buildings, to the relevant Urban Safety Plan Facility, are designated in city planning for Specified Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone.
７　前項の場合においては、同項に規定する建築物の高さの最低限度より低い高さの建築物の部分（同項に規定する建築物の防災都市計画施設に係る間口率の最低限度を超える部分を除く。）は、空隙のない壁が設けられる等防火上有効な構造としなければならない。
(7) Parts of the building that is lower than the minimum height of a buildings provided for in the preceding paragraph (excluding parts that exceed the minimum frontage ratio related to the Urban Safety Plan Facility of the building provided by the preceding paragraph), under the case of that paragraph must be constructed so that it effectively prevents fire with, for example, installing a wall without voids.
８　前二項の建築物の防災都市計画施設に係る間口率及び高さの算定に関し必要な事項は、政令で定める。
(8) Items necessary to calculate the frontage ratio and the height facing to the Urban Safety Plan Facility of a building in the preceding two paragraphs shall be specified by Cabinet Order.
９　前三項の規定は、次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物については、適用しない。
(9) The provisions of the preceding 3 paragraphs shall not apply to buildings coming under any of the following items.
一　第三項第一号に掲げる建築物
(i) building set forth in paragraph (3), item (i);
二　学校、駅舎、卸売市場その他これらに類する公益上必要な建築物で、特定行政庁が用途上又は構造上やむを得ないと認めて許可したもの
(ii) schools, station buildings, wholesale markets, or other similar buildings that are necessary for the public good and have been found that there is unavoidable because the use or the structure, and granted permission by the Designated Administrative Agency.
１０　第四十四条第二項の規定は、第三項第二号、第五項第二号又は前項第二号の規定による許可をする場合に準用する。
(10) The provisions of Article 44, paragraph (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis to a case where permission is given under paragraph (3), item (ii), paragraph (5), item (ii), or item (ii) of the preceding paragraph.
（第三十八条の準用）
(Application of Article 38 Mutatis Mutandis)
第六十七条の二　第三十八条の規定は、その予想しない特殊の構造方法又は建築材料を用いる建築物に対する前条第一項及び第二項の規定の適用について準用する。
Article 67-2  The provisions of Article 38 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the application of the provisions referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) of the preceding Article, in relation to buildings in which unforeseen special structural methods and construction materials are used.
第六節　景観地区
Section 6 Landscape Districts
第六十八条　景観地区内においては、建築物の高さは、景観地区に関する都市計画において建築物の高さの最高限度又は最低限度が定められたときは、当該最高限度以下又は当該最低限度以上でなければならない。ただし、次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物については、この限りでない。
Article 68  (1) In a Landscape District, when the maximum height of buildings and the minimum height of buildings are specified by city planning for Landscape Districts, the height of buildings must be equal to or lower than the relevant maximum height, or be equal to or higher than the relevant minimum limit. Provided, however, that this shall not apply to buildings coming under any of the following items.
一　公衆便所、巡査派出所その他これらに類する建築物で、公益上必要なもの
(i) public toilet, police box, or other building similar thereto necessary for the public interest;
二　特定行政庁が用途上又は構造上やむを得ないと認めて許可したもの
(ii) those of which the Designated Administrative Agency has found that there is unavoidable because the use or the structure and granted permission.
２　景観地区内においては、建築物の壁又はこれに代わる柱は、景観地区に関する都市計画において壁面の位置の制限が定められたときは、建築物の地盤面下の部分を除き、当該壁面の位置の制限に反して建築してはならない。ただし、次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物については、この限りでない。
(2) In a Landscape District, the walls or columns that replaces the relevant walls of a building shall, in a case where restrictions on the location of wall surfaces are specified by city planning for Landscape Districts, not be constructed in non-compliance with the relevant restrictions on the locations of the relevant wall surfaces, excluding parts of the building below ground level. Provided, however, that this shall not apply to buildings coming under any of the following items.
一　前項第一号に掲げる建築物
(i) buildings set forth in item (i) of the preceding paragraph;
二　学校、駅舎、卸売市場その他これらに類する公益上必要な建築物で、特定行政庁が用途上又は構造上やむを得ないと認めて許可したもの
(ii) schools, station buildings, wholesale markets, or other similar buildings that are necessary for the public good and have been found that there is unavoidable because the use or the structure, and granted permission by the Designated Administrative Agency;
３　景観地区内においては、建築物の敷地面積は、景観地区に関する都市計画において建築物の敷地面積の最低限度が定められたときは、当該最低限度以上でなければならない。ただし、次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物の敷地については、この限りでない。
(3) In a Landscape District, the site area of a building must be not less than the relevant minimum site area, in a case where the minimum site area of buildings is specified by city planning for Landscape Districts. Provided, however, that this shall not apply to the sites of buildings coming under any of the following items.
一　第一項第一号に掲げる建築物
(i) buildings set forth in paragraph (1), item (i);
二　特定行政庁が用途上又は構造上やむを得ないと認めて許可したもの
(ii) those of which the Designated Administrative Agency has found that there is unavoidable because the use or the structure and granted permission
４　第五十三条の二第三項の規定は、前項の都市計画において建築物の敷地面積の最低限度が定められ、又は変更された場合に準用する。この場合において、同条第三項中「第一項」とあるのは、「第六十八条第三項」と読み替えるものとする。
(4) The provisions of Article 53-2, paragraph (3) shall apply mutatis mutandis in a case where the minimum site area of a building is specified by city planning in the preceding paragraph or has been revised. In this case, the term "paragraph (1)" in paragraph (3) of that Article shall be replaced with, "Article 68, paragraph (3)".
５　景観地区に関する都市計画において建築物の高さの最高限度、壁面の位置の制限（道路に面する壁面の位置を制限するものを含むものに限る。）及び建築物の敷地面積の最低限度が定められている景観地区（景観法第七十二条第二項の景観地区工作物制限条例で、壁面後退区域（当該壁面の位置の制限として定められた限度の線と敷地境界線との間の土地の区域をいう。）における工作物（土地に定着する工作物以外のものを含む。）の設置の制限（当該壁面後退区域において連続的に有効な空地を確保するため必要なものを含むものに限る。）が定められている区域に限る。）内の建築物で、当該景観地区に関する都市計画の内容に適合し、かつ、敷地内に有効な空地が確保されていること等により、特定行政庁が交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めるものについては、第五十六条の規定は、適用しない。
(5) A building that is in a Landscape District where the maximum height of buildings, restrictions on the location of wall surfaces (limited to those that include restrictions on the position of wall surfaces facing a road), and the minimum site area of buildings are specified by city planning for Landscape Districts (limited to the Districts where restrictions on the locations of structures (including any other structures not anchored to the ground) in Wall Surfaces Setback Area (refers to part of the land between site boundary and the line of the limit specified as the restriction on the location of the relevant wall surfaces, under the Ordinance on restrictions on structures, under the Article 72, paragraph (2) of the Landscape Act) are set, for the purpose of continuous effective open space in the relevant Wall Surfaces Setback Area), shall be exempted from the provisions of Article 56 if, because the relevant building complies with the provisions of the city planning for relevant Landscape Districts, and has effective open space in its site, the Designated Administrative Agency recognizes that its exemption from the relevant provisions will not be detrimental from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire protection, and sanitation.
６　第四十四条第二項の規定は、第一項第二号、第二項第二号又は第三項第二号の規定による許可をする場合に準用する。
(6) The provisions of Article 44, paragraph (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis in cases of approval under paragraph (1), item (ii); paragraph (2), item (ii); or paragraph (3) item (ii).
第七節　地区計画等の区域
Section 7 Areas of District Plans
（市町村の条例に基づく制限）
(Restrictions Based on Ordinance of Municipality)
第六十八条の二　市町村は、地区計画等の区域（地区整備計画、特定建築物地区整備計画、防災街区整備地区整備計画、歴史的風致維持向上地区整備計画、沿道地区整備計画又は集落地区整備計画（以下「地区整備計画等」という。）が定められている区域に限る。）内において、建築物の敷地、構造、建築設備又は用途に関する事項で当該地区計画等の内容として定められたものを、条例で、これらに関する制限として定めることができる。
Article 68-2  (1) A municipality may prescribe by ordinances that in areas of District Planning, etc. (limited to the areas where District Development Plans, Specified Building District Development Plans, Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone Plans, Historic Scenery Maintenance And Improvement District Development Plans, Roadside District Development Plans, or Rural Hamlet District Improvement Plans (hereinafter referred to as "District Development Plans, etc.") is established), items concerning the site, structure, building equipment or use of buildings in the content of the District Planning, etc. concerned can be restrictions on those items of buildings.
２　前項の規定による制限は、建築物の利用上の必要性、当該区域内における土地利用の状況等を考慮し、地区計画、防災街区整備地区計画、歴史的風致維持向上地区計画又は沿道地区計画の区域にあつては適正な都市機能と健全な都市環境を確保するため、集落地区計画の区域にあつては当該集落地区計画の区域の特性にふさわしい良好な居住環境の確保と適正な土地利用を図るため、それぞれ合理的に必要と認められる限度において、同項に規定する事項のうち特に重要な事項につき、政令で定める基準に従い、行うものとする。
(2) Restrictions under the preceding paragraph shall be effected as to especially important items among those under that paragraph in compliance with the standards established by Cabinet Order in consideration of those items as the necessity for utilization of buildings, circumstances of land use, etc., in areas of District Plans, Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone Plans, Historic Scenery Maintenance And Improvement District Plans, or Roadside District Plans with the aim of ensuring property city functions and sound city environments, and in areas of Rural District Plans with the aim of ensuring favorable living environments and proper land use which match characteristics of areas for the Rural District Plans concerned, within limits considered reasonable in each case.
３　第一項の規定に基づく条例で建築物の敷地面積に関する制限を定める場合においては、当該条例に、当該条例の規定の施行又は適用の際、現に建築物の敷地として使用されている土地で当該規定に適合しないもの又は現に存する所有権その他の権利に基づいて建築物の敷地として使用するならば当該規定に適合しないこととなる土地について、その全部を一の敷地として使用する場合の適用の除外に関する規定（第三条第三項第一号及び第五号の規定に相当する規定を含む。）を定めるものとする。
(3) If restrictions on the site area of a building are specified by ordinances based on the provisions of paragraph (1), those ordinances shall have provisions for exemption with respect to land which is actually used as the site of a building at the time of enforcement application of the provisions referred to in the relevant ordinances and is not in compliance with the relevant provisions, or with respect to land which comes to be unconformable to the relevant provisions if it is used as the site of a building on the basis of actually existing ownership or other right, for cases where the entire area of the relevant land is used as one site.
４　第一項の規定に基づく条例で建築物の構造に関する防火上必要な制限を定める場合においては、当該条例に、第六十五条の規定の例により、当該制限を受ける区域の内外にわたる建築物についての当該制限に係る規定の適用に関する措置を定めるものとする。
(4) If restrictions on the construction methods of buildings necessary for fire prevention are specified by ordinances based on the provisions of paragraph (1), those ordinances shall have measures concerning the application of the provisions to buildings extending outside of the area subject to the restrictions concerned as an example of the provisions referred to in Article 65.
５　市町村は、用途地域における用途の制限を補完し、当該地区計画等（集落地区計画を除く。）の区域の特性にふさわしい土地利用の増進等の目的を達成するため必要と認める場合においては、国土交通大臣の承認を得て、第一項の規定に基づく条例で、第四十八条第一項から第十三項までの規定による制限を緩和することができる。
(5) When a municipality finds that it is necessary to supplement restrictions on use in Use Districts in order to achieve the goal of increasing land use suited to the characteristics of the areas in the relevant District Planning, etc. (excluding Rural District Plans), the municipality may relax the restrictions under Article 48, paragraphs (1) through (13) under an ordinance based on the provisions of paragraph (1) with the approval of the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism.
（再開発等促進区等内の制限の緩和等）
(Relaxation of Regulations in Redevelopment Promotion Districts)
第六十八条の三　地区計画又は沿道地区計画の区域のうち再開発等促進区（都市計画法第十二条の五第三項に規定する再開発等促進区をいう。以下同じ。）又は沿道再開発等促進区（沿道整備法第九条第三項に規定する沿道再開発等促進区をいう。以下同じ。）で地区整備計画又は沿道地区整備計画が定められている区域のうち建築物の容積率の最高限度が定められている区域内においては、当該地区計画又は沿道地区計画の内容に適合する建築物で、特定行政庁が交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めるものについては、第五十二条の規定は、適用しない。
Article 68-3  (1) In areas where the upper limit of the floor area ratio of buildings is specified, and which is, from among areas in District Plans or in Roadside District Plans, Redevelopment Promotion Districts (refers to Redevelopment Promotion Districts under the provisions of Article 12-5, paragraph (3) of the City Planning Act; the same applies hereinafter), or Roadside Redevelopment Promotion Districts (refers to Roadside Redevelopment Promotion Districts under the provisions of Article 9, paragraph (3) of the Roadside Development Act; the same applies hereinafter), and which is an area specified by District Development Plans or Roadside District Development Plans, the provisions of Article 52 shall not apply to a building that complies with the provisions of the relevant District Development Plans or the relevant Roadside District Development Plans if the Designated Administrative Agency has confirmed that there is no objection from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire protection, and sanitation.
２　地区計画又は沿道地区計画の区域のうち再開発等促進区又は沿道再開発等促進区（地区整備計画又は沿道地区整備計画が定められている区域のうち当該地区整備計画又は沿道地区整備計画において十分の六以下の数値で建築物の建蔽率の最高限度が定められている区域に限る。）内においては、当該地区計画又は沿道地区計画の内容に適合する建築物で、特定行政庁が交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めるものについては、第五十三条第一項から第三項まで、第七項及び第八項の規定は、適用しない。
(2) In areas which are, from among areas in District Plans or in Roadside District Plans, Redevelopment Promotion Districts or Roadside Redevelopment Promotion Districts (among areas specified by District Development Plans or Roadside District Development Plans, limited to districts where the upper limit of the building coverage ratio of a building is specified as a value equal to or less than 6/10 in the relevant District Development Plans or Roadside District Development Plans), the provisions of Article 53, paragraphs (1) through (3), paragraphs (7) and (8) shall not apply to a building that complies with the provisions of the relevant District Development Plans or the relevant Roadside District Development Plans if the Designated Administrative Agency has confirmed that it will not be detrimental from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire protection, and sanitation.
３　地区計画又は沿道地区計画の区域のうち再開発等促進区又は沿道再開発等促進区（地区整備計画又は沿道地区整備計画が定められている区域のうち二十メートル以下の高さで建築物の高さの最高限度が定められている区域に限る。）内においては、当該地区計画又は沿道地区計画の内容に適合し、かつ、その敷地面積が政令で定める規模以上の建築物であつて特定行政庁が交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めるものについては、第五十五条第一項及び第二項の規定は、適用しない。
(3) In areas which are, from among areas in District Plans or in Roadside District Plans, Redevelopment Promotion Districts or Roadside Redevelopment Promotion Districts (limited to the areas where District Development Plans or Roadside District Development Plans are established and the maximum height of buildings is specified as 20 meters or less), the provisions of Article 55, paragraphs (1) and (2) shall not apply to buildings which conform to the contents of the relevant District Plans or Roadside District Plans concerned and of which site area is at least as large as that specified by Cabinet Order, if the Designated Administrative Agency concludes that there is no objection from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire prevention and sanitation.
４　地区計画又は沿道地区計画の区域のうち再開発等促進区又は沿道再開発等促進区（地区整備計画又は沿道地区整備計画が定められている区域に限る。第六項において同じ。）内においては、敷地内に有効な空地が確保されていること等により、特定行政庁が交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めて許可した建築物については、第五十六条の規定は、適用しない。
(4) In areas which are, from among areas in District Plans or in Roadside District Plans, Redevelopment Promotion Districts or Roadside Redevelopment Promotion Districts (limited to the areas where District Development Plans or Roadside District Development Plans are established; the same in paragraph (6)), the provisions of Article 56 shall not apply to buildings which, having provided effective open space on the site, etc., the Designated Administrative Agency has granted permission after concluding that there is no objection from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire prevention and sanitation.
５　第四十四条第二項の規定は、前項の規定による許可をする場合に準用する。
(5) The provision of Article 44, paragraph (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis when permission is granted under the preceding paragraph.
６　地区計画又は沿道地区計画の区域のうち再開発等促進区又は沿道再開発等促進区内の建築物に対する第四十八条第一項から第十三項まで（これらの規定を第八十七条第二項又は第三項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定の適用については、第四十八条第一項から第十一項まで及び第十三項中「又は公益上やむを得ない」とあるのは「公益上やむを得ないと認め、又は地区計画若しくは沿道地区計画において定められた土地利用に関する基本方針に適合し、かつ、当該地区計画若しくは沿道地区計画の区域における業務の利便の増進上やむを得ない」と、同条第十二項中「工業の利便上又は公益上必要」とあるのは「工業の利便上若しくは公益上必要と認め、又は地区計画若しくは沿道地区計画において定められた土地利用に関する基本方針に適合し、かつ、当該地区計画若しくは沿道地区計画の区域における業務の利便の増進上やむを得ない」とする。
(6) In applying the provisions referred to in Article 48, paragraphs (1) through (13) (including cases where these provisions apply mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (2) or (3) to buildings in Redevelopment Promotion Districts or Roadside Redevelopment Promotion Districts among areas of District Plans or Roadside District Plans, the phrase "or that it is permissible in light of the public interest" in Article 48, paragraphs (1) through (12) and paragraph (13), shall read "or that it is permissible in light of the public interest, or that it conforms to basic policies on land use specified in District Plans or Roadside District Plans, and that it is permissible to promote convenience of business in the areas of the relevant District Plans or Roadside District Plans", the phrase "that it is necessary for the conducting of industry or for the public interest" in paragraph (12) of that Article, shall read "that it is necessary for the conducting of industry or for the public interest, or that it conforms to basic policies on land use specified in District Plans or Roadside District Plans, and that it is permissible to promote convenience of business in the areas of the relevant District Plans or Roadside District Plans".
７　地区計画の区域のうち開発整備促進区（都市計画法第十二条の五第四項に規定する開発整備促進区をいう。以下同じ。）で地区整備計画が定められているものの区域（当該地区整備計画において同法第十二条の十二の土地の区域として定められている区域に限る。）内においては、別表第二（か）項に掲げる建築物のうち当該地区整備計画の内容に適合するもので、特定行政庁が交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めるものについては、第四十八条第六項、第七項、第十二項及び第十四項の規定は、適用しない。
(7) In areas which are, from among areas in District Plans, Development and Improvement Promotion Districts (refers to Development and Improvement Promotion Districts under the provision of Article 12-5, paragraph (4) of the City Planning Act; the same applies hereinafter), and which are specified by District Development Plans (limited to areas specified by the relevant District Development Plans as the areas specified in Article 12-12 of the same Act), the provisions of Article 48, paragraphs (6), (7), (12) and (14) shall not apply to buildings which, among those set forth in row (m) of Appended Table 2, conform to the contents of the relevant District Development Plans, if the Designated Administrative Agency has confirmed that there is no objection from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire protection, and sanitation.
８　地区計画の区域のうち開発整備促進区（地区整備計画が定められている区域に限る。）内の建築物（前項の建築物を除く。）に対する第四十八条第六項、第七項、第十二項及び第十四項（これらの規定を第八十七条第二項又は第三項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定の適用については、第四十八条第六項、第七項及び第十四項中「又は公益上やむを得ない」とあるのは「公益上やむを得ないと認め、又は地区計画において定められた土地利用に関する基本方針に適合し、かつ、当該地区計画の区域における商業その他の業務の利便の増進上やむを得ない」と、同条第十二項中「工業の利便上又は公益上必要」とあるのは「工業の利便上若しくは公益上必要と認め、又は地区計画において定められた土地利用に関する基本方針に適合し、かつ、当該地区計画の区域における商業その他の業務の利便の増進上やむを得ない」とする。
(8) In applying the provisions referred to in Article 48, paragraphs (6), (7), (12) and (14) (including cases where these provisions apply mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (2) or (3) to buildings in areas which are, from among areas in District Plans, Development and Improvement Promotion Districts (limited to areas specified by District Development Plans) (excluding the buildings specified in the preceding paragraph), the phrase "or that it is permissible in light of the public interest" in Article 48, paragraph (6), (7) and (14), shall read "or that is permissible in light of the public interest, or that it conforms to basic policies on land use specified in District Plans, and that it is permissible to promote convenience of commerce and other businesses in the areas of the relevant District Plans", the phrase "that it is necessary for the conducting of industry or for the public interest" in paragraph (12) of that Article, shall read "that it is necessary for the conducting of industry or for the public interest, or that it conforms to basic policies on land use specified in District Plans, and that it is permissible to promote convenience of commerce and other businesses in the areas of the relevant District Plans."
９　歴史的風致維持向上地区計画の区域（歴史的風致維持向上地区整備計画が定められている区域に限る。）内の建築物に対する第四十八条第一項から第十三項まで（これらの規定を第八十七条第二項又は第三項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定の適用については、第四十八条第一項から第十一項まで及び第十三項中「又は公益上やむを得ない」とあるのは「公益上やむを得ないと認め、又は歴史的風致維持向上地区計画において定められた土地利用に関する基本方針に適合し、かつ、当該歴史的風致維持向上地区計画の区域における歴史的風致（地域歴史的風致法第一条に規定する歴史的風致をいう。）の維持及び向上を図る上でやむを得ない」と、同条第十二項中「工業の利便上又は公益上必要」とあるのは「工業の利便上若しくは公益上必要と認め、又は歴史的風致維持向上地区計画において定められた土地利用に関する基本方針に適合し、かつ、当該歴史的風致維持向上地区計画の区域における歴史的風致（地域歴史的風致法第一条に規定する歴史的風致をいう。）の維持及び向上を図る上でやむを得ない」とする。
(9) In applying the provisions referred to in Article 48, paragraphs (1) through (13) to buildings in areas of Historic Scenery Maintenance And Improvement District Plans (limited to areas specified by Historic Scenery Maintenance And Improvement District Development Plans) (including cases where these provisions apply mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (2) or (3), the phrase "it is permissible in light of the public interest" in Article 48, paragraphs (1) through (11) and paragraph (13), shall read "it is permissible in light of the public interest, or that it conforms to basic policies on land use specified in Historic Scenery Maintenance and Improvement District Plans, and is permissible in order to maintain and improve the historical scenery (refers to historical scenery defined in Article 1 of the Historic Scenery Act) in the area of the relevant Historical Scenery Maintenance and Improvement District Plans" , the phrase "that it is necessary for the conducting of industry or for the public interest" in paragraph (12) of that Article, shall read, "that it is necessary for the conducting of industry or for the public interest, or that it conforms to basic policies on land use specified in Historic Scenery Maintenance and Improvement District Plans, and is permissible in order to maintain and improve the historical scenery (refers to historical scenery defined in Article 1 of the Historic Scenery Act) in the area of the relevant Historical Scenery Maintenance and Improvement District Plans."
（建築物の容積率の最高限度を区域の特性に応じたものと公共施設の整備の状況に応じたものとに区分して定める地区計画等の区域内における建築物の容積率の特例）
(Special Rules for the Floor Area Ratio of a Building in Areas in District Planning where the Upper Limit of the Floor Area Ratio of a Building is Set According to the Characteristics of the District and is Categorized According to the State of the Provision of Public Facilities)
第六十八条の四　次に掲げる条件に該当する地区計画、防災街区整備地区計画又は沿道地区計画（防災街区整備地区計画にあつては、密集市街地整備法第三十二条第二項第一号に規定する地区防災施設（以下単に「地区防災施設」という。）の区域が定められているものに限る。以下この条において同じ。）の区域内にある建築物で、当該地区計画、防災街区整備地区計画又は沿道地区計画の内容（都市計画法第十二条の六第二号、密集市街地整備法第三十二条の二第二号又は沿道整備法第九条の二第二号の規定による公共施設の整備の状況に応じた建築物の容積率の最高限度（以下この条において「公共施設の整備の状況に応じた建築物の容積率の最高限度」という。）を除く。）に適合し、かつ、特定行政庁が交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めるものについては、公共施設の整備の状況に応じた建築物の容積率の最高限度に関する第二号の条例の規定は、適用しない。
Article 68-4  The provisions of the ordinance in item (ii) concerning the upper limit of the floor area ratio of a building according to the state of provision of public facilities shall not apply to a building in an area in District Plans, Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone Plans, or Roadside District Plans, (in the case of a Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone Plans, limited to those for which areas of district facilities for disaster prevention provided by Article 32, paragraph (2), item (i) of the Concentrated Urban Areas Development Act (hereinafter referred to simply as "district facilities for disaster prevention") are specified; the same in this Article) that satisfies the following conditions, and that complies with the content of the relevant District Plans, Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone Plans, or Roadside District Plans, (excluding the upper limit of the floor area ratio of a building according to the state of provision of public facilities under Article 12-6, item (ii) of the City Planning Act, Article 32-2, item (ii) of the Concentrated Urban Areas Development Act, or Article 9-2, item (ii) of the Roadside Development Act (hereinafter in this Article referred to as "upper limit of the floor area ratio of a building according to the state of the provision of public facilities")), and if the Designated Administrative Agency has concluded that there is no objection from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire protection, and sanitation:
一　地区整備計画、特定建築物地区整備計画、防災街区整備地区整備計画又は沿道地区整備計画が定められている区域のうち、次に掲げる事項が定められている区域であること。
(i) among areas specified by a District Development Plans, Specified Building District Development Plans, Disaster Prevention Block Improvement District Development Plans, or Roadside District Development Plans, an area set forth the following items;
イ　都市計画法第十二条の六、密集市街地整備法第三十二条の二又は沿道整備法第九条の二の規定による区域の特性に応じたものと公共施設の整備の状況に応じたものとに区分した建築物の容積率の最高限度
(a) upper limit of the floor area ratio of a building categorized according to the characteristics of the area under Article 12-6 of the City Planning Act, Article 32-2 of the Concentrated Urban Areas Development Act or Article 9-2 of the Roadside Development Act and according to the state of the provision of public facilities;
ロ　（１）から（３）までに掲げる区域の区分に従い、当該（１）から（３）までに定める施設の配置及び規模
(b) the layout and scale of the facilities set forth in 1. through 3. below according to the category of the area in 1. through 3. respectively.
（１）　地区整備計画の区域　都市計画法第十二条の五第二項第一号に規定する地区施設又は同条第五項第一号に規定する施設
1. area of District Development Plans: District facilities provided for in Article 12-5, paragraph (2), item (i) of the City Planning Act or facilities provided for in paragraph (5), item (i) of that Article;
（２）　防災街区整備地区整備計画の区域　密集市街地整備法第三十二条第二項第二号に規定する地区施設
2. area of Disaster Prevention Block Improvement District Development Plans: District facilities provided for in Article 32, paragraph (2), item (ii) of the Concentrated Urban Areas Development Act;
（３）　沿道地区整備計画の区域　沿道整備法第九条第二項第一号に規定する沿道地区施設又は同条第四項第一号に規定する施設
3. area of Roadside District Development Plans: Roadside district facilities provided for in Article 9, paragraph (2), item (i) of the Roadside Development Act or facilities provided for in paragraph (4), item (i) of that Article;
二　第六十八条の二第一項の規定に基づく条例で、前号イに掲げる事項に関する制限が定められている区域であること。
(ii) an area where restrictions concerning the items set forth in (a) in the preceding item are provided for under ordinances based on the provisions of Article 68-2, paragraph (1).
（区域を区分して建築物の容積を適正に配分する地区計画等の区域内における建築物の容積率の特例）
(Special Rules regarding the Floor Area Ratio of a Building in Areas in District Planning that Categorizes Areas to Appropriately Distribute the Capacity of Buildings)
第六十八条の五　次に掲げる条件に該当する地区計画又は沿道地区計画の区域内にある建築物については、当該地区計画又は沿道地区計画において定められた建築物の容積率の最高限度を第五十二条第一項第一号から第四号までに定める数値とみなして、同条の規定を適用する。
Article 68-5  In the case of a building in an area in District Plans or Roadside District Plans that satisfies the following conditions, the upper limit of the floor area ratio of a building specified by the relevant District Plans or Roadside District Plans shall be considered to be the values provided for in Article 52, paragraph (1), items (i) through (iv), and the provisions of this Article shall apply:
一　地区整備計画又は沿道地区整備計画（都市計画法第十二条の七又は沿道整備法第九条の三の規定により、地区整備計画又は沿道地区整備計画の区域を区分して建築物の容積率の最高限度が定められているものに限る。）が定められている区域であること。
(i) areas of land specified by District Development Plans or Roadside District Development Plans (limited to those for which the area of the District Development Plans or Roadside District Development Plans is categorized to set the upper limit of the floor area ratio of buildings pursuant to the provisions of Article 12-7 of the City Planning Act or Article 9-3 of the Roadside Development Act);
二　前号の建築物の容積率の最高限度が当該区域に係る用途地域において定められた建築物の容積率を超えるものとして定められている区域にあつては、地区整備計画又は沿道地区整備計画において次に掲げる事項が定められており、かつ、第六十八条の二第一項の規定に基づく条例でこれらの事項に関する制限が定められている区域であること。
(ii) an area where the upper limit of the floor area ratio of a building in the preceding item is set as a ratio that exceeds the floor area ratio of the building set in a Use District related to the relevant area shall be an area where the following items are set in a District Development Plans or in a Roadside District Development Plans and an area where restrictions concerning the following items an ordinance based on the provisions of Article 68-2, paragraph (1).
イ　建築物の容積率の最低限度
(a) lower limit of the floor area ratio of a building;
ロ　建築物の敷地面積の最低限度
(b) lower limit of the site area of a building;
ハ　壁面の位置の制限（道路に面する壁面の位置を制限するものを含むものに限る。）
(c) restriction on the location of the wall surface (limited to those that include a restriction on the location of the wall surface facing a road).
（区域を区分して建築物の容積を適正に配分する特定建築物地区整備計画等の区域内における建築物の容積率の特例）
(Special Rules regarding the Floor Area Ratio of a Building in Areas in Specified Building District Development Plans that Categorizes Areas to Appropriately Distribute the Capacity of Buildings)
第六十八条の五の二　次に掲げる条件に該当する防災街区整備地区計画の区域内にある建築物（第二号に規定する区域内の建築物にあつては、防災街区整備地区計画の内容に適合する建築物で、特定行政庁が交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めるものに限る。）については、当該防災街区整備地区計画において定められた建築物の容積率の最高限度を第五十二条第一項第一号から第四号までに定める数値とみなして、同条の規定を適用する。
Article 68-5-2  In the case of a building in an area in Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone Plans that satisfies the following conditions (in the case of building in an area provided by item (ii), limited to buildings that conform to the contents of the Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone Plans, and which the Designated Administrative Agency has approved as not being detrimental from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire prevention, and sanitation), the upper limit of the floor area ratio of a building specified by the relevant Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone Plans shall be considered to be the values provided for in Article 52, paragraph (1), items (i) through (iv), and the provisions of that Article shall apply:
一　特定建築物地区整備計画及び防災街区整備地区整備計画（いずれも密集市街地整備法第三十二条の三第一項の規定により、その区域をそれぞれ区分し、又は区分しないで建築物の容積率の最高限度が定められているものに限る。）が定められている区域であること。
(i) areas of land specified by Specified Building District Development Plans and Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone Plans (in both cases, limited to those for which their respective areas are categorized or not categorized to set the upper limit of the floor area ratio of buildings pursuant to the provisions of Article 32-3, paragraph (1) of the Concentrated Urban Areas Development Act);
二　前号の建築物の容積率の最高限度が当該区域に係る用途地域において定められた建築物の容積率を超えるものとして定められている区域にあつては、特定建築物地区整備計画において次に掲げる事項が定められており、かつ、第六十八条の二第一項の規定に基づく条例でこれらの事項に関する制限が定められている区域であること。
(ii) an area where the upper limit of the floor area ratio of a building in the preceding item is set as a ratio that exceeds the floor area ratio of the building set in a Use District related to the relevant area shall be an area where the following items are set in a Specified Building District Development Plans and the area is an area for which restrictions concerning these matters are specified by ordinances based on the provisions of Article 68-2, paragraph (1).
イ　建築物の容積率の最低限度
(a) lower limit of the floor area ratio of a building;
ロ　建築物の敷地面積の最低限度
(b) lower limit of the site area of a building;
ハ　壁面の位置の制限（道路に面する壁面の位置を制限するものを含むものに限る。）
(c) restriction on the location of the wall surface (limited to those that include a restriction on the location of the wall surface facing a road).
（高度利用と都市機能の更新とを図る地区計画等の区域内における制限の特例）
(Special Rules regarding Restrictions in Areas of District Planning to Promote Advanced Use and the Renewal of Urban Functions)
第六十八条の五の三　次に掲げる条件に該当する地区計画又は沿道地区計画の区域内にある建築物については、当該地区計画又は沿道地区計画において定められた建築物の容積率の最高限度を第五十二条第一項第二号から第四号までに定める数値とみなして、同条の規定を適用する。
Article 68-5-3  (1) With respect to buildings in areas of District Plans or Roadside District Plans coming under the following requirements, the upper limit of the floor area ratio of a building specified in the planning concerned shall be considered to be the value specified in each item in Article 52, paragraph (1), items (ii) through (iv), and the provisions in that Article shall be applied:
一　都市計画法第十二条の八又は沿道整備法第九条の四の規定により、次に掲げる事項が定められている地区整備計画又は沿道地区整備計画の区域であること。
(i) an area in District Development Plans or Roadside District Development Plans specified by the following items pursuant to the provisions of Article 12-8 of the City Planning Act or in Article 9-4 of the Roadside Development Act;
イ　建築物の容積率の最高限度
(a) upper limit of the floor area ratio of a building;
ロ　建築物の容積率の最低限度（沿道地区整備計画において沿道整備法第九条第六項第二号の建築物の沿道整備道路に係る間口率の最低限度及び建築物の高さの最低限度が定められている場合にあつては、これらの最低限度）、建築物の建蔽率の最高限度、建築物の建築面積の最低限度及び壁面の位置の制限（壁面の位置の制限にあつては、市街地の環境の向上を図るため必要な場合に限る。）
(b) lower limit of the floor area ratio of a building (if the lower limit of the frontage ratio related to the roadside development road of a building under Article 9, paragraph (6), item (ii) of the Roadside Development Act in Roadside District Development Plans and the lower limit of the height of the building are specified, these lower limits), upper limit of the building coverage ratio of the building, lower limit of the building area and restriction on the location of the wall surface of the building (in the case of a restriction on the location of the wall surface, limited to those for which it is necessary to improve the urban environment).
二　第六十八条の二第一項の規定に基づく条例で、前号ロに掲げる事項（壁面の位置の制限にあつては、地区整備計画又は沿道地区整備計画に定められたものに限る。）に関する制限が定められている区域であること。
(ii) areas for which restrictions are specified concerning the items (in the case of restriction on the location of the wall surface, limited to cases specified by District Development Plans or in Roadside District Development Plans) set forth in the preceding item (b) by ordinances based on the provisions of Article 68-2 paragraph (1).
２　前項各号に掲げる条件に該当する地区計画又は沿道地区計画の区域内においては、敷地内に道路に接して有効な空地が確保されていること等により、特定行政庁が、交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めて許可した建築物については、第五十六条第一項第一号及び第二項から第四項までの規定は、適用しない。
(2) The provisions of Article 56, paragraph (1), item (i) and paragraphs (2) through (4) shall not apply to a building in an area in District Plans or in Roadside District Plans that satisfies the conditions set forth in each item of the preceding paragraph and which the Designated Administrative Agency has approved, concluding that the provision of effective open space inside the site that is in contact with the road guarantees that the exemption will not be detrimental from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire protection, and sanitation.
３　第四十四条第二項の規定は、前項の規定による許可をする場合に準用する。
(3) The provisions of Article 44, paragraph (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis when permission is granted under the preceding paragraph.
（住居と住居以外の用途とを区分して定める地区計画等の区域内における建築物の容積率の特例）
(Special Rules regarding the Floor Area Ratio in a Building in Areas in District Planning Specified for Specified Residential Use or Use Other than Residential)
第六十八条の五の四　次に掲げる条件に該当する地区計画、防災街区整備地区計画又は沿道地区計画の区域内にあるその全部又は一部を住宅の用途に供する建築物については、当該地区計画、防災街区整備地区計画又は沿道地区計画において定められた建築物の容積率の最高限度を第五十二条第一項第二号又は第三号に定める数値とみなして、同条（第八項を除く。）の規定を適用する。ただし、当該建築物が同条第三項の規定により建築物の延べ面積の算定に当たりその床面積が当該建築物の延べ面積に算入されない部分を有するときは、当該部分の床面積を含む当該建築物の容積率は、当該建築物がある地域に関する都市計画において定められた同条第一項第二号又は第三号に定める数値の一・五倍以下でなければならない。
Article 68-5-4  In the case of a building completely or partially provided for residential use that is located in an area in District Plans, Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone Plans, or Roadside District Development Plans that satisfies the following conditions, the upper limit of the floor area ratio of the building specified by the relevant District Plans, Disaster Prevention Block Improvement Zone Plans, or Roadside District Development Plans shall be considered to be the value provided for in Article 52, paragraph (1), item (ii) or (iii), and the provisions of that Article (excluding paragraph (8)) shall apply. Provided, however, that when the relevant buildings includes a part of which floor area is not included in the total floor area of the relevant building to calculate the total floor area of the building pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (3) of that Article, the floor area ratio of the relevant building including the floor area of the relevant part must be a value equal to or lower than 1.5 times the value provided for in paragraph (1), items (ii) and (iii) of that Article specified by city planning for the zone where the relevant building is located:
一　次に掲げる事項が定められている地区整備計画、特定建築物地区整備計画、防災街区整備地区整備計画又は沿道地区整備計画の区域であること。
(i) an area in District Development Plans, Specified Building District Development Plans, Disaster Prevention Block Improvement District Development Plans, or Roadside District Development Plans provided for in the following items;
イ　築物の容積率の最高限度（都市計画法第十二条の九、密集市街地整備法第三十二条の四又は沿道整備法第九条の五の規定により、それぞれ都市計画法第十二条の九第一号、密集市街地整備法第三十二条の四第一号又は沿道整備法第九条の五第一号に掲げるものの数値が第五十二条第一項第二号又は第三号に定める数値以上その一・五倍以下で定められているものに限る。）
(a) upper limit of the floor area ratio of a building (limited to those for which, pursuant to the provisions of Article 12-9 of the City Planning Act, Article 32-4 of the Concentrated Urban Areas Development Act or Article 9-5 of the Roadside Development Act respectively, the values pursuant to Article 12-9, item (i) of the City Planning Act, Article 32-4, item (i) of the Concentrated Urban Areas Development Act or Article 9-5, item (i) of the Roadside Development Act respectively shall be greater than a value provided for in Article 52, paragraph (1), item (ii) or (iii) and shall be equal to or less than 1.5 times the relevant value).
ロ　建築物の容積率の最低限度
(b) lower limit of the floor area ratio of the building;
ハ　建築物の敷地面積の最低限度
(c) lower limit of the site area of the building;
ニ　壁面の位置の制限（道路に面する壁面の位置を制限するものを含むものに限る。）
(d) restriction on the location of the wall surface (limited to cases including a restriction on the location of the wall surface facing a road).
二　第六十八条の二第一項の規定に基づく条例で、前号ロからニまでに掲げる事項に関する制限が定められている区域であること。
(ii) an area where restrictions on the items set forth in (b) to (d) of the preceding item are specified by an ordinance based on the provisions of Article 68-2, paragraph (1);
三　当該区域が第一種住居地域、第二種住居地域、準住居地域、近隣商業地域、商業地域又は準工業地域内にあること。
(iii) case where the relevant area is inside Category 1 Residential Districts, Category 2 Residential Districts, Quasi-residential Districts, Neighborhood Commercial Districts, Commercial Districts, or Quasi-industrial Districts.
（区域の特性に応じた高さ、配列及び形態を備えた建築物の整備を誘導する地区計画等の区域内における制限の特例）
(Special Rules regarding Restrictions in Areas in District Planning that Encourages the Construction of Buildings with Height, Configuration, and Form Suitable to the Characteristics of the Area)
第六十八条の五の五　次に掲げる条件に該当する地区計画等（集落地区計画を除く。以下この条において同じ。）の区域内の建築物で、当該地区計画等の内容に適合し、かつ、特定行政庁が交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めるものについては、第五十二条第二項の規定は、適用しない。
Article 68-5-5  (1) The provisions of Article 52, paragraph (2) shall not apply to a building in an area in District Planning, etc. (excluding Rural District Plans: the same in this Article) that satisfied the following conditions, that complies with the content of the relevant District Planning, etc. and for which the Designated Administrative Agency has concluded that the exemption will not be detrimental from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire protection, and sanitation:
一　次に掲げる事項が定められている地区整備計画等（集落地区整備計画を除く。）の区域であること。
(i) an area in District Development Plans, etc. (excluding Rural Hamlet District Improvement Plans) provided by the following items:
イ　都市計画法第十二条の十、密集市街地整備法第三十二条の五、地域歴史的風致法第三十二条又は沿道整備法第九条の六の規定による壁面の位置の制限、壁面後退区域（壁面の位置の制限として定められた限度の線と敷地境界線との間の土地の区域をいう。以下この条において同じ。）における工作物の設置の制限及び建築物の高さの最高限度
(a) restriction on the location of the wall surface under Article 12-10 of the City Planning Act, Article 32-45 of the Concentrated Urban Areas Development Act, Article 32 of the Historic Scenery Act, or Article 9-6 of the Roadside Development Act, restriction on the installation of a structure and upper limit of the height of a building in Wall Surface Setback Area (shall refer to the area of ground between the limit line specified as the restriction on the location of the wall surface and the boundary line of the site; the same in this Article);
ロ　建築物の容積率の最高限度
(b) upper limit of the floor area ratio of the building;
ハ　建築物の敷地面積の最低限度
(c) lower limit of the site area of the building.
二　第六十八条の二第一項の規定に基づく条例で、前号イ及びハに掲げる事項（壁面後退区域における工作物の設置の制限を除く。）に関する制限が定められている区域であること。
(ii) an area where restrictions on the items set forth in (a) and (c) of the preceding items (excluding restrictions on the installation of a structure in Wall Surface Setback Area) are specified by an ordinance based on the provisions of Article 68-2, paragraph (1).
２　前項第一号イ及びハに掲げる事項が定められており、かつ、第六十八条の二第一項の規定に基づく条例で前項第一号イ及びハに掲げる事項（壁面後退区域における工作物の設置の制限を除く。）に関する制限が定められている地区計画等の区域内にある建築物で、当該地区計画等の内容に適合し、かつ、敷地内に有効な空地が確保されていること等により、特定行政庁が交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めるものについては、第五十六条の規定は、適用しない。
(2) The provisions of Article 56 shall not apply to a building in an area of a District Planning, etc. that stipulates the items set forth in items (i), (a) and (c) of the preceding paragraph, and stipulates restrictions concerning the items set forth in item (i), (a) and (c) of the preceding paragraph by an ordinance based on the provisions of Article 68-2, paragraph (1) (excluding restrictions on the installation of a structure in Wall Surface Setback Area), that complies with the contents of the relevant District Planning, etc. and for which the Designated Administrative Agency concluded that the provision of effective open space inside the site guarantees that the exemption will not be detrimental from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire protection, and sanitation.
（地区計画等の区域内における建築物の建蔽率の特例）
(Special Rules regarding the Building Coverage Ratio of a Building in Areas of District Planning)
第六十八条の五の六　次に掲げる条件に該当する地区計画等（集落地区計画を除く。）の区域内の建築物については、第一号イに掲げる地区施設等の下にある部分で、特定行政庁が交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めるものの建築面積は、第五十三条第一項及び第二項、第五十七条の五第一項及び第二項、第五十九条第一項、第五十九条の二第一項、第六十条の二第一項、第六十八条の八、第八十六条第三項及び第四項、第八十六条の二第二項及び第三項、第八十六条の五第三項並びに第八十六条の六第一項に規定する建築物の建蔽率の算定の基礎となる建築面積に算入しない。
Article 68-5-6  The building area of part of a building in an area of District Planning, etc. (excluding Rural District Plans) that satisfies the following conditions that is under a district facility, etc. set forth in item (i), (a) shall, if the Designated Administrative Agency concludes that it is not detrimental from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire prevention, and sanitation, not be included in the building area that is the grounds for the calculation of the building coverage ratio of the building under the provisions of Article 53, paragraphs (1) and (2); Article 57-5, paragraphs (1) and (2); Article 59, paragraph (1); Article 59-2, paragraph (1); Article 60-2, paragraph (1); Article 68-8; Article 86, paragraphs (3) and (4); Article 86-2, paragraphs (2) and (3); Article 86-5, paragraph (3); and Article 86-6, paragraph (1).
一　地区整備計画等（集落地区整備計画を除く。）が定められている区域のうち、次に掲げる事項が定められている区域であること。
(i) among areas specified by District Development Plans, etc. (excluding Rural Hamlet District Improvement Plans), areas provided by the following items;
イ　その配置が地盤面の上に定められている通路その他の公共空地である地区施設等（第六十八条の四第一号ロに規定する施設、地域歴史的風致法第三十一条第二項第一号に規定する地区施設又は地区防災施設をいう。以下同じ。）
(a) district facilities, etc. that are passageways or other public space similar thereto of which arrangement on the ground surface is specified. (refers to facilities provided by Article 68-4, item (i), (b), district facilities or district facilities for disaster prevention provided by Article 31, paragraph (2), item (i) of the Historic Scenery Act; the same applies hereinafter);
ロ　壁面の位置の制限（イの地区施設等に面する壁面の位置を制限するものを含むものに限る。）
(b) restriction on the location of the wall surface (limited to those for which the location of the wall surface facing the district facility, etc. in (a) is included).
二　第六十八条の二第一項の規定に基づく条例で、前号ロに掲げる事項に関する制限が定められている区域であること。
(ii) an area where restrictions concerning the matters set forth in (b) of the preceding item are specified by an ordinance based on the provisions of Article 68-2, paragraph (1).
（道路の位置の指定に関する特例）
(Special Rules regarding Designation of Location of Roads)
第六十八条の六　地区計画等に道の配置及び規模又はその区域が定められている場合には、当該地区計画等の区域（次の各号に掲げる地区計画等の区分に応じて、当該各号に定める事項が定められている区域に限る。次条第一項において同じ。）における第四十二条第一項第五号の規定による位置の指定は、地区計画等に定められた道の配置又はその区域に即して行わなければならない。ただし、建築物の敷地として利用しようとする土地の位置と現に存する道路の位置との関係その他の事由によりこれにより難いと認められる場合においては、この限りでない。
Article 68-6  If the location and size or area of roadways have been specified in the District Planning, etc., the designation of location under Article 42, paragraph (1), item (v) in areas of the District Plans concerned, etc. (limited to areas where the matters specified in each of the relevant items are specified according to the categorization of the District Planning, etc. set forth in each of the following items; the same in paragraph (1) of the following Article) must be made according to the location of roadways or the area specified under the District Planning, etc. Provided, however, that this shall not apply if it is deemed unfeasible on the ground of the relationship between the location of the land intended to be used as the site of a building and the location of actually existing roads, or other similar reasons:
一　地区計画　再開発等促進区若しくは開発整備促進区（いずれも都市計画法第十二条の五第五項第一号に規定する施設の配置及び規模が定められているものに限る。）又は地区整備計画
(i) district Plans: Redevelopment Promotion District or Development and Improvement Promotion District (in both cases, limited to those for which the layout and scale of facilities prescribed in the provisions of Article 12-5, paragraph (5), item (i) of the City Planning Act are specified) or District Development Plans;
二　防災街区整備地区計画　地区防災施設の区域又は防災街区整備地区整備計画
(ii) disaster Prevention Block Improvement District Development Plans: Areas of district facilities for disaster prevention, or Disaster Prevention Block Improvement District Development Plans;
三　歴史的風致維持向上地区計画　歴史的風致維持向上地区整備計画
(iii) historical Scenery Maintenance and Improvement District Plans: Historical Scenery Maintenance and Improvement District Development Plan;
四　沿道地区計画　沿道再開発等促進区（沿道整備法第九条第四項第一号に規定する施設の配置及び規模が定められているものに限る。）又は沿道地区整備計画
(iv) roadside District Plans: Roadside Redevelopment Promotion District (limited to those for which the layout and scale of facilities prescribed in Article 9, paragraph (4), item (i) of the Roadside Development Act are specified) or Roadside District Development Plans.
五　集落地区計画　集落地区整備計画
(v) rural District Plans: Rural Hamlet District Improvement Plans.
（予定道路の指定）
(Designation of Planned Roads)
第六十八条の七　特定行政庁は、地区計画等に道の配置及び規模又はその区域が定められている場合で、次の各号の一に該当するときは、当該地区計画等の区域において、地区計画等に定められた道の配置及び規模又はその区域に即して、政令で定める基準に従い、予定道路の指定を行うことができる。ただし、第二号又は第三号に該当する場合で当該指定に伴う制限により当該指定の際現に当該予定道路の敷地となる土地を含む土地について所有権その他の権利を有する者が当該土地をその権利に基づいて利用することが著しく妨げられることとなるときは、この限りでない。
Article 68-7  (1) The Designated Administrative Agency may designate planned roads according to the location and size or area of roadways as specified in the District Planning, etc., in compliance with the criteria established by Cabinet Order, if the location and size or area of roadways have been specified in the District Planning, etc., and those cases come under any of the following items. Provided, however, that this shall not apply if a party, in cases of item (2) or (3), who, at the time of the designation, actually has ownership or other right to lands which include the land intended to be a site of a planned road, comes to be extremely encumbered in exercising whose right to use the relevant land due to restrictions accompanying the designation:
一　当該指定について、当該予定道路の敷地となる土地の所有者その他の政令で定める利害関係を有する者の同意を得たとき。
(i) if consent has been obtained with respect to the designation, from the owner of the land intended to be a site of a planned road or that of other persons having interests specified by Cabinet Order;
二　土地区画整理法による土地区画整理事業又はこれに準ずる事業により主要な区画道路が整備された区域において、当該指定に係る道が新たに当該区画道路に接続した細街路網を一体的に形成するものであるとき。
(ii) in areas where main block-partitioning roads are readjusted by land readjustment work or other work equivalent thereto under the Land Readjustment Act, if the roadways pertaining to the designation integrally form a network of narrow streets newly connected with the relevant block-partitioning roads;
三　地区計画等においてその配置及び規模又はその区域が定められた道の相当部分の整備が既に行われている場合で、整備の行われていない道の部分に建築物の建築等が行われることにより整備された道の機能を著しく阻害するおそれがあるとき。
(iii) if a considerable part of roadways of which arrangement and size or area were determined has been already adjusted in the District Planning, etc., and there is a fear that the function of the adjusted roadways might be extremely hampered due to the construction, etc. of buildings on the unadjusted part of the roadways.
２　特定行政庁は、前項の規定により予定道路の指定を行う場合（同項第一号に該当する場合を除く。）においては、あらかじめ、建築審査会の同意を得なければならない。
(2) If the Designated Administrative Agency intends to designate planned roads pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph (excluding cases of item (i) of that paragraph), it must obtain the prior consent of the Building Review Council.
３　第四十六条第一項後段、第二項及び第三項の規定は、前項に規定する場合について準用する。
(3) The provisions of the latter part of paragraph (1) of Article 46, paragraphs (2) and (3) of that Article shall apply mutatis mutandis to cases as specified in the preceding paragraph.
４　第一項の規定により予定道路が指定された場合においては、当該予定道路を第四十二条第一項に規定する道路とみなして、第四十四条の規定を適用する。
(4) If planned roads are designated pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (1), those planned roads shall be considered to be roads as specified in Article 42, paragraph (1), and the provisions of Article 44 shall apply.
５　第一項の規定により予定道路が指定された場合において、建築物の敷地が予定道路に接するとき又は当該敷地内に予定道路があるときは、特定行政庁が交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めて許可した建築物については、当該予定道路を第五十二条第二項の前面道路とみなして、同項から同条第七項まで及び第九項の規定を適用するものとする。この場合においては、当該敷地のうち予定道路に係る部分の面積は、敷地面積又は敷地の部分の面積に算入しないものとする。
(5) With respect to a building of which site will be abutted on or will be crossed by a planned road that is designated pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (1), and in which the Designated Administrative Agency grants permission after concluding that there is no objection from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire prevention, and sanitation, the planned road concerned will be considered to be a front road in Article 52, paragraph (2), and the provisions from that paragraph through paragraph (7) and paragraph (9) will apply. In this case, the surface area of that part of the site concerned that will be occupied by the planned road shall not be included in computations of the site area or part of the site area.
６　第四十四条第二項の規定は、前項の規定による許可をする場合に準用する。
(6) The provision of Article 44, paragraph (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis when permission is granted under the preceding paragraph.
（建築物の敷地が地区計画等の区域の内外にわたる場合の措置）
(Measures for Sites of Buildings Extending Inside and Outside Areas of District Planning)
第六十八条の八　第六十八条の二第一項の規定に基づく条例で建築物の容積率の最高限度又は建築物の建蔽率の最高限度が定められた場合において、建築物の敷地が当該条例による制限を受ける区域の内外にわたるときは、当該条例で定められた建築物の容積率の最高限度又は建築物の建蔽率の最高限度を、それぞれ当該建築物の当該条例による制限を受ける区域内にある部分に係る第五十二条第一項及び第二項の規定による建築物の容積率の限度又は第五十三条第一項の規定による建築物の建蔽率の限度とみなして、第五十二条第七項、第十四項及び第十五項又は第五十三条第二項及び第四項から第六項までの規定を適用する。
Article 68-8  If the upper limit of the floor area ratio of a building or the upper limit of the building coverage ratio of a building has been specified by ordinances based on the provisions of Article 68-2, paragraph (1), and if the site of a building extends inside and outside the area subject to the restrictions of the relevant ordinances, the upper limit of the floor area ratio of a building or the upper limit of the building coverage ratio of a building specified by the relevant ordinances shall be considered respectively to be the limit of the floor area ratio of a building under Article 52, paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), or limit of the building coverage ratio of a building under Article 53, paragraph (1), and the provisions of Article 52, paragraphs (7), (14) and (15), or Article 53, paragraph (2) and paragraphs (4) through (6) shall apply.
第八節　都市計画区域及び準都市計画区域以外の区域内の建築物の敷地及び構造
Section 8 Site and Construction of Buildings in Areas Other than City Planning Areas and Quasi-city Planning Areas
第六十八条の九　第六条第一項第四号の規定に基づき、都道府県知事が関係市町村の意見を聴いて指定する区域内においては、地方公共団体は、当該区域内における土地利用の状況等を考慮し、適正かつ合理的な土地利用を図るため必要と認めるときは、政令で定める基準に従い、条例で、建築物又はその敷地と道路との関係、建築物の容積率、建築物の高さその他の建築物の敷地又は構造に関して必要な制限を定めることができる。
Article 68-9  (1) Based on the provisions of Article 6, paragraph (1), item (iv), in the areas designated by the prefectural governor upon hearing the opinions of the related municipalities, if a local government finds it necessary to conduct proper and reasonable land use that takes into consideration the status of the land use in the relevant area, the prefectural governor may set the required restrictions on the relationship between roads and a building or of which site, the floor area ratio of a building, the height of a building, and other building sites or structure, by ordinances in compliance with criteria as specified by Cabinet Order.
２　景観法第七十四条第一項の準景観地区内においては、市町村は、良好な景観の保全を図るため必要があると認めるときは、政令で定める基準に従い、条例で、建築物の高さ、壁面の位置その他の建築物の構造又は敷地に関して必要な制限を定めることができる。
(2) In Quasi-landscape Districts under Article 74, paragraph (1) of the Landscape Act, if municipality finds it necessary to conserve good quality scenery, the municipality is able to set necessary restrictions on the height of buildings, the locations of wall surfaces, and other building sites or structure, by ordinances in compliance with criteria as specified by Cabinet Order.
第三章の二　型式適合認定等
Chapter III-2 Type-Approval
（型式適合認定）
(Type-approval)
第六十八条の十　国土交通大臣は、申請により、建築材料又は主要構造部、建築設備その他の建築物の部分で、政令で定めるものの型式が、前三章の規定又はこれに基づく命令の規定（第六十八条の二十五第一項の構造方法等の認定の内容を含む。）のうち当該建築材料又は建築物の部分の構造上の基準その他の技術的基準に関する政令で定める一連の規定に適合するものであることの認定（以下「型式適合認定」という。）を行うことができる。
Article 68-10  (1) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may, upon application, approve certain types of building materials or principal building parts, building equipment, or other parts of buildings specified by Cabinet Order that conform to a series of provisions specified by Cabinet Order concerning criteria of construction for the relevant building materials or parts of buildings, or other technical criteria among those provisions of the preceding three Chapters or provisions of orders based thereon (including the content of approvals of construction methods, etc. under Article 68-25, paragraph (1)), (hereinafter referred to as "type-approval").
２　型式適合認定の申請の手続その他型式適合認定に関し必要な事項は、国土交通省令で定める。
(2) Procedures for type-approval applications and other necessary items concerning type-approval shall be specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（型式部材等製造者の認証）
(Certification of Specific-Type Products Manufacturers)
第六十八条の十一　国土交通大臣は、申請により、規格化された型式の建築材料、建築物の部分又は建築物で、国土交通省令で定めるもの（以下この章において「型式部材等」という。）の製造又は新築（以下この章において単に「製造」という。）をする者について、当該型式部材等の製造者としての認証を行う。
Article 68-11  (1) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism shall, upon application, certify a person who performs manufacturing or newly constructing (hereinafter in this Chapter referred to simply as "manufacturing") of standardized types of building materials, parts of buildings or buildings specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order (hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as "specific type products"), as a manufacturer of the relevant specific type products.
２　前項の申請をしようとする者は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、国土交通省令で定める事項を記載した申請書を提出して、これを行わなければならない。
(2) An applicant under the preceding paragraph must apply by submitting a written application containing the items specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
３　国土交通大臣は、第一項の規定による認証をしたときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(3) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism performs the certification under paragraph (1), as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, the Minister must publicly notify to that effect.
（欠格条項）
(Disqualification)
第六十八条の十二　次の各号のいずれかに該当する者は、前条第一項の規定による認証を受けることができない。
Article 68-12  A person coming under any one of the following items is not qualified for certification under paragraph (1) of the preceding Article:
一　建築基準法令の規定により刑に処せられ、その執行を終わり、又は執行を受けることがなくなつた日から起算して二年を経過しない者
(i) a person who has been sentenced to punishment pursuant to the provisions of building standard laws and regulations, and for whom two years have not yet elapsed since the date on which relevant execution has been completed or has become no longer subject to execution;
二　第六十八条の二十一第一項若しくは第二項又は第六十八条の二十三第一項若しくは第二項の規定により認証を取り消され、その取消しの日から起算して二年を経過しない者
(ii) a person whose certification was revoked pursuant to the provisions of Article 68-21, paragraph (1) or (2), or Article 68-23, paragraph (1) or (2), and for whom two years have not yet elapsed since the date of the relevant revocation;
三　法人であつて、その役員のうちに前二号のいずれかに該当する者があるもの
(iii) a corporation of which director comes under either one of the preceding two items.
（認証の基準）
(Certification Criteria)
第六十八条の十三　国土交通大臣は、第六十八条の十一第一項の申請が次に掲げる基準に適合していると認めるときは、同項の規定による認証をしなければならない。
Article 68-13  If the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism finds that an application under Article 68-11, paragraph (1) conforms to the following criteria, the Minister must grant certification under that paragraph:
一　申請に係る型式部材等の型式で型式部材等の種類ごとに国土交通省令で定めるものが型式適合認定を受けたものであること。
(i) the specific type products subject to the application shall have received a type-approval concerning the parts specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order in accordance with each kind of the relevant specific-type products;
二　申請に係る型式部材等の製造設備、検査設備、検査方法、品質管理方法その他品質保持に必要な技術的生産条件が国土交通省令で定める技術的基準に適合していると認められること。
(ii) it shall be confirmed that manufacturing equipment, inspection equipment, inspection methods, quality control methods, and other technical production conditions necessary to maintain the quality of the relevant specific-type products subject to the application conform to technical criteria established by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（認証の更新）
(Renewal of Certification)
第六十八条の十四　第六十八条の十一第一項の規定による認証は、五年以上十年以内において政令で定める期間ごとにその更新を受けなければ、その期間の経過によつて、その効力を失う。
Article 68-14  (1) If a certification under Article 68-11, paragraph (1) is not renewed at an interval from five to ten years specified by Cabinet Order, it shall cease to be effective.
２　第六十八条の十一第二項及び前二条の規定は、前項の認証の更新の場合について準用する。
(2) The provisions in Article 68-11, paragraph (2) and the preceding two Articles shall apply mutatis mutandis to the renewal of certification specified in the preceding paragraph.
（承継）
(Succession)
第六十八条の十五　第六十八条の十一第一項の認証を受けた者（以下この章において「認証型式部材等製造者」という。）が当該認証に係る型式部材等の製造の事業の全部を譲渡し、又は認証型式部材等製造者について相続、合併若しくは分割（当該認証に係る型式部材等の製造の事業の全部を承継させるものに限る。）があつたときは、その事業の全部を譲り受けた者又は相続人（相続人が二人以上ある場合において、その全員の同意により当該事業を承継すべき相続人を選定したときは、その者。以下この条において同じ。）、合併後存続する法人若しくは合併により設立した法人若しくは分割によりその事業の全部を承継した法人は、その認証型式部材等製造者の地位を承継する。ただし、当該事業の全部を譲り受けた者又は相続人、合併後存続する法人若しくは合併により設立した法人若しくは分割により当該事業の全部を承継した法人が第六十八条の十二各号のいずれかに該当するときは、この限りでない。
Article 68-15  When a person certified under Article 68-11, paragraph (1) (hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as "certified specific-type products manufacturer") cedes all of the specific-type products manufacturing business concerning the relevant certification or there has been a succession, merger or division involving the relevant certified specific-type products manufacturer (limited to those for which all of the business of manufacturing the specific-type products concerning the relevant certification is ceded), the person or successor who has undertaken entire the business (when there are two or more successors, a person selected as the successor with unanimous agreement; the same in this Article), a corporation which will continue the work after the merger, or a corporation established by the merger, or a corporation that has succeeded to the entire business as a result of the division shall succeed to the position of the relevant certified specific-type products manufacturer. Provided, however, that this shall not apply if the relevant person or successor who has undertaken entire relevant business, a corporation which will continue the work after the merger, or a corporation established by the merger, or a corporation that has succeeded to the entire business as a result of the division comes under any one of the items in Article 68-12.
（変更の届出）
(Notification of Revisions)
第六十八条の十六　認証型式部材等製造者は、第六十八条の十一第二項の国土交通省令で定める事項に変更（国土交通省令で定める軽微なものを除く。）があつたときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、その旨を国土交通大臣に届け出なければならない。
Article 68-16  When there has been a change in items specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order under Article 68-11, paragraph (2) (excluding minor changes specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order), as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, a certified specific-type products manufacturer must notify the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism to that effect.
（廃止の届出）
(Notification of Abandonment)
第六十八条の十七　認証型式部材等製造者は、当該認証に係る型式部材等の製造の事業を廃止しようとするときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、あらかじめ、その旨を国土交通大臣に届け出なければならない。
Article 68-17  (1) When a certified specific-type products manufacturer has closed the business of manufacturing the specific-type products, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, the manufacturer must notify the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism to that effect in advance.
２　前項の規定による届出があつたときは、当該届出に係る第六十八条の十一第一項の規定による認証は、その効力を失う。
(2) When a notification under the preceding paragraph is submitted, the certification under Article 68-11, paragraph (1) for the relevant notification shall cease to be effective.
３　国土交通大臣は、第一項の規定による届出があつたときは、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(3) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism receives the notification under paragraph (1), the Minister must publicly notify to that effect.
（型式適合義務等）
(Type-approval Obligation)
第六十八条の十八　認証型式部材等製造者は、その認証に係る型式部材等の製造をするときは、当該型式部材等がその認証に係る型式に適合するようにしなければならない。ただし、輸出のため当該型式部材等の製造をする場合、試験的に当該型式部材等の製造をする場合その他の国土交通省令で定める場合は、この限りでない。
Article 68-18  (1) When a certified specific-type products manufacturer manufactures specific-type products for that certification, it must be ensured that the products conform to the type concerning the certification. Provided, however, that this shall not apply if the relevant specific-type products are manufactured for export or for trial, and in other cases specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
２　認証型式部材等製造者は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、製造をする当該認証に係る型式部材等について検査を行い、その検査記録を作成し、これを保存しなければならない。
(2) A certified specific-type product manufacturer must perform inspections of the specific-type products subject to the certification, and prepare and keep inspection records for them, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（表示等）
(Special Indication)
第六十八条の十九　認証型式部材等製造者は、その認証に係る型式部材等の製造をしたときは、これに当該型式部材等が認証型式部材等製造者が製造をした型式部材等であることを示す国土交通省令で定める方式による特別な表示を付することができる。
Article 68-19  (1) When a certified specific-type products manufacturer has manufactured specific-type products, the relevant manufacturer may attach a special indication to it using a method specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order to indicate that the relevant products were manufactured by a certified specific-type products manufacturer.
２　何人も、前項の規定による場合を除くほか、建築材料、建築物の部分又は建築物に、同項の表示又はこれと紛らわしい表示を付してはならない。
(2) No person except for the cases under the preceding paragraph shall attach an indication under that paragraph or a misleading indication thereof to any building materials, parts of buildings, or buildings.
（認証型式部材等に関する確認及び検査の特例）
(Special Rules for Confirmations and Inspections for Certified Specific-type Products)
第六十八条の二十　認証型式部材等製造者が製造をするその認証に係る型式部材等（以下この章において「認証型式部材等」という。）は、第六条第四項に規定する審査、第六条の二第一項の規定による確認のための審査又は第十八条第三項に規定する審査において、その認証に係る型式に適合するものとみなす。
Article 68-20  (1) Specific-type products manufactured by a certified specific-type products manufacturer (hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as "certified specific-type products") shall be considered to conform to the type concerning the certification under the examination specified in Article 6, paragraph (4), the certification for the confirmation under Article 6-2, paragraph (1), or the certification specified in Article 18, paragraph (3).
２　建築物以外の認証型式部材等で前条第一項の表示を付したもの及び建築物である認証型式部材等でその新築の工事が国土交通省令で定めるところにより建築士である工事監理者によつて設計図書のとおり実施されたことが確認されたものは、第七条第四項、第七条の二第一項、第七条の三第四項、第七条の四第一項又は第十八条第十七項若しくは第二十項の規定による検査において、その認証に係る型式に適合するものとみなす。
(2) Certified specific-type products excluding buildings with the indication provided for in paragraph (1) of the preceding Article, or a building of a certified specific-type product that was constructed in conformity with the design drawings/specifications by a person who conducts construction administration (Kenchikushi) as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, shall be considered to conform to the type concerning the certification under the inspections under Article 7, paragraph (4); Article 7-2, paragraph (1); Article 7-3, paragraph (4); Article 7-4, paragraph (1); or Article 18, paragraph (17) or (20).
（認証の取消し）
(Revocation of Certification)
第六十八条の二十一　国土交通大臣は、認証型式部材等製造者が次の各号のいずれかに該当するときは、その認証を取り消さなければならない。
Article 68-21  (1) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism must revoke the certification of a certified specific-type products manufacturer when it comes under any of the following items:
一　第六十八条の十二第一号又は第三号に該当するに至つたとき。
(i) the manufacturer comes under either Article 68-12, item (i) or (iii);
二　当該認証に係る型式適合認定が取り消されたとき。
(ii) the type-approval concerning the certification has been canceled.
２　国土交通大臣は、認証型式部材等製造者が次の各号のいずれかに該当するときは、その認証を取り消すことができる。
(2) the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may revoke the certification of a certified specific-type products manufacturer when it comes under any one of the following items:
一　第六十八条の十六、第六十八条の十八又は第六十八条の十九第二項の規定に違反したとき。
(i) the manufacturer has violated a provision of Article 68-16, Article 68-18, or Article 68-19, paragraph (2);
二　認証型式部材等の製造設備、検査設備、検査方法、品質管理方法その他品質保持に必要な技術的生産条件が、第六十八条の十三第二号の国土交通省令で定める技術的基準に適合していないと認めるとき。
(ii) it is concluded that the manufacturing equipment, inspection equipment, inspection method, quality control method or other technical production conditions necessary for the maintenance of quality of the certified specific-type products do not conform to technical criteria established by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order in Article 68-13, item (ii);
三　不正な手段により認証を受けたとき。
(iii) the manufacturer was certified by illegal means.
３　国土交通大臣は、前二項の規定により認証を取り消したときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(3) When The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism revokes the certification pursuant to the provisions of the preceding two paragraphs, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, the Minister must publicly notify to that effect.
（外国型式部材等製造者の認証）
(Certification of Overseas Specific-type Products Manufacturers)
第六十八条の二十二　国土交通大臣は、申請により、外国において本邦に輸出される型式部材等の製造をする者について、当該型式部材等の外国製造者としての認証を行う。
Article 68-22  (1) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism shall, upon application, certify a person that manufactures a specific-type product in a foreign country for export to Japan as an overseas manufacturer of the relevant specific-type product.
２　第六十八条の十一第二項及び第三項並びに第六十八条の十二から第六十八条の十四までの規定は前項の認証に、第六十八条の十五から第六十八条の十九までの規定は同項の認証を受けた者（以下この章において「認証外国型式部材等製造者」という。）に、第六十八条の二十の規定は認証外国型式部材等製造者が製造をする型式部材等に準用する。この場合において、第六十八条の十九第二項中「何人も」とあるのは「認証外国型式部材等製造者は」と、「建築材料」とあるのは「本邦に輸出される建築材料」と読み替えるものとする。
(2) The provisions of Article 68-11, paragraphs (2) and (3), and Articles 68-12 through 68-14 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the certification under the preceding paragraph, the provisions of Articles 68-15 through 68-19 and Article 68-21 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the person certified under that paragraph (hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as "certified overseas specific-type products manufacturer"), and the provisions of Article 68-20 shall apply mutatis mutandis to specific-type products manufactured by a certified overseas specific-type products manufacturer. In these cases, the term "person" in Article 68-19, paragraph (2) shall be replaced with, "certified overseas specific-type products manufacturer" and the phrase "building materials, parts of buildings, or buildings" shall be replaced with "building materials, parts of buildings, or buildings exported to Japan."
（認証の取消し）
(Revocation of Certification)
第六十八条の二十三　国土交通大臣は、認証外国型式部材等製造者が次の各号のいずれかに該当するときは、その認証を取り消さなければならない。
Article 68-23  (1) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism must revoke the certification of a certified overseas specific-type products manufacturer when it comes under any of the following items:
一　前条第二項において準用する第六十八条の十二第一号又は第三号に該当するに至つたとき。
(i) the overseas manufacturer comes under either Article 68-12, item (i) or (iii) applied mutatis mutandis in paragraph (2) of the preceding Article;
二　当該認証に係る型式適合認定が取り消されたとき。
(ii) the type-approval concerning the certification has been canceled.
２　国土交通大臣は、認証外国型式部材等製造者が次の各号のいずれかに該当するときは、その認証を取り消すことができる。
(2) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may revoke the certification of a certified overseas specific-type products manufacturer when it comes under any of the following items:
一　前条第二項において準用する第六十八条の十六、第六十八条の十八又は第六十八条の十九第二項の規定に違反したとき。
(i) the overseas manufacturer has violated a provision of Article 68-16, Article 68-18, or Article 68-19, paragraph (2) applied mutatis mutandis in paragraph (2) of the preceding Article;
二　認証に係る型式部材等の製造設備、検査設備、検査方法、品質管理方法その他品質保持に必要な技術的生産条件が、前条第二項において準用する第六十八条の十三第二号の国土交通省令で定める技術的基準に適合していないと認めるとき。
(ii) it is concluded that the manufacturing equipment, inspection equipment, inspection method, quality control method or other technical production conditions necessary for the maintenance of quality of the specific-type products concerning the certification do not conform to technical criteria established by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order in Article 68-13, item (ii) applied mutatis mutandis in paragraph (2) of the preceding Article;
三　不正な手段により認証を受けたとき。
(iii) the overseas manufacturer was certified by illegal means;
四　第十五条の二第一項の規定による報告若しくは物件の提出をせず、又は虚偽の報告若しくは虚偽の物件の提出をしたとき。
(iv) the overseas manufacturer has failed to submit reports or objects under Article 15-2, paragraph (1), or has submitted false reports or false objects;
五　第十五条の二第一項の規定による検査若しくは試験を拒み、妨げ、若しくは忌避し、又は同項の規定による質問に対して答弁をせず、若しくは虚偽の答弁をしたとき。
(v) the overseas manufacturer refused, prevented, or evaded inspections or testing under Article 15-2, paragraph (1), or has failed to respond to questions or provide false responses under that paragraph;
六　第四項の規定による費用の負担をしないとき。
(vi) the overseas manufacturer does not bear expenses under paragraph (4).
３　国土交通大臣は、前二項の規定により認証を取り消したときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(3) When The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism revokes the certification pursuant to the provisions of the preceding two paragraphs, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, the Minister must publicly notify to that effect.
４　第十五条の二第一項の規定による検査又は試験に要する費用（政令で定めるものに限る。）は、当該検査又は試験を受ける認証外国型式部材等製造者の負担とする。
(4) Expenses required for the inspection or testing under Article 15-2, paragraph (1) (limited to those specified by Cabinet Order) shall be borne by the certified overseas specific-type products manufacturer that received the relevant inspection or testing.
（指定認定機関等による認定等の実施）
(Approval by Designated Approval Body)
第六十八条の二十四　国土交通大臣は、第七十七条の三十六から第七十七条の三十九までの規定の定めるところにより指定する者に、型式適合認定又は第六十八条の十一第一項若しくは第六十八条の二十二第一項の規定による認証、第六十八条の十四第一項（第六十八条の二十二第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の認証の更新及び第六十八条の十一第三項（第六十八条の二十二第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による公示（以下「認定等」という。）の全部又は一部を行わせることができる。
Article 68-24  (1) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may have a person designated in accordance with the provisions referred to in Articles 77-36 through 77-39 to perform all or part of type-approval or certification under Article 68-11, paragraph (1); or Article 68-22, paragraph (1); renewal of certification under Article 68-14, paragraph (1) (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 68-22, paragraph (2)); and public notice under Article 68-11, paragraph (3) (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 68-22, paragraph (2)) (hereinafter referred to as "approval, etc.").
２　国土交通大臣は、前項の規定による指定をしたときは、当該指定を受けた者が行う認定等を行わないものとする。
(2) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism designates a person under the preceding paragraph, the Minister shall not perform the approval, etc. performed by the relevant designated person.
３　国土交通大臣は、第七十七条の五十四の規定の定めるところにより承認する者に、認定等（外国において事業を行う者の申請に基づき行うものに限る。）の全部又は一部を行わせることができる。
(3) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may have a person recognized in accordance with the provisions referred to in Article 77-54 to perform all or part of the approval, etc. (limited to those based on an application by the person performing the work overseas).
（構造方法等の認定）
(Approval of Construction Methods)
第六十八条の二十五　構造方法等の認定（前三章の規定又はこれに基づく命令の規定で、建築物の構造上の基準その他の技術的基準に関するものに基づき国土交通大臣がする構造方法、建築材料又はプログラムに係る認定をいう。以下同じ。）の申請をしようとする者は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、国土交通省令で定める事項を記載した申請書を国土交通大臣に提出して、これをしなければならない。
Article 68-25  (1) An applicant for approval of a construction method, etc. (referring to approval of a construction method, building materials or program by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism based on provisions concerning structural criteria or other technical criteria of the building under the preceding three Chapters or orders based thereon; the same applies hereinafter) must apply by submitting a written application containing items specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order to the Minister, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
２　国土交通大臣は、構造方法等の認定のための審査に当たつては、審査に係る構造方法、建築材料又はプログラムの性能に関する評価（以下この条において単に「評価」という。）に基づきこれを行うものとする。
(2) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism shall perform an examination to approve construction methods, etc. based on evaluations of the performance of the construction method, building materials or program (hereinafter in this Article referred to simply as "evaluation").
３　国土交通大臣は、第七十七条の五十六の規定の定めるところにより指定する者に、構造方法等の認定のための審査に必要な評価の全部又は一部を行わせることができる。
(3) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may have a person designated in accordance with the provisions referred to in Article 77-56 to perform all or part of evaluations necessary for examination to approve construction methods, etc.
４　国土交通大臣は、前項の規定による指定をしたときは、当該指定を受けた者が行う評価を行わないものとする。
(4) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism designates a person under the preceding paragraph, the Minister shall not perform the evaluations performed by the relevant designated person.
５　国土交通大臣が第三項の規定による指定をした場合において、当該指定に係る構造方法等の認定の申請をしようとする者は、第七項の規定により申請する場合を除き、第三項の規定による指定を受けた者が作成した当該申請に係る構造方法、建築材料又はプログラムの性能に関する評価書（以下この条において「性能評価書」という。）を第一項の申請書に添えて、これをしなければならない。この場合において、国土交通大臣は、当該性能評価書に基づき構造方法等の認定のための審査を行うものとする。
(5) When a designation under paragraph (3) has been performed by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, an applicant for approval of a construction method, etc. concerning the relevant designation must apply by submitting a written application specified in paragraph (1) with a written performance evaluation of the construction method, building materials or program prepared by a designated person under paragraph (3) (hereinafter in this Article referred to as "performance evaluation report"), except in the case pursuant to the provision of paragraph (7). In this case, the Minister shall perform an examination to approve the construction method, etc. based on the relevant performance evaluation report.
６　国土交通大臣は、第七十七条の五十七の規定の定めるところにより承認する者に、構造方法等の認定のための審査に必要な評価（外国において事業を行う者の申請に基づき行うものに限る。）の全部又は一部を行わせることができる。
(6) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may have a person recognized in accordance with the provisions referred to in Article 77-57 to perform all or part of evaluations necessary for examination to approve construction methods, etc. (limited to those based on an application by the person performing the work overseas).
７　外国において事業を行う者は、前項の承認を受けた者が作成した性能評価書を第一項の申請書に添えて構造方法等の認定を申請することができる。この場合において、国土交通大臣は、当該性能評価書に基づき構造方法等の認定のための審査を行うものとする。
(7) A person performing the work overseas may apply for approval of a construction method, etc. by submitting a written application specified in paragraph (1) with a performance evaluation report prepared by a recognized person under the preceding paragraph. In this case, the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism shall perform an examination to approve the construction method, etc. based on the relevant performance evaluation report.
（特殊構造方法等認定）
(Approval of Special Structural Methods)
第六十八条の二十六　特殊構造方法等認定（第三十八条（第六十六条及び第六十七条の二において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による認定をいう。以下同じ。）の申請をしようとする者は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、国土交通省令で定める事項を記載した申請書を国土交通大臣に提出して、これをしなければならない。
Article 68-26  A person intending to apply for approval of a special structural method, etc. (approval under Article 38 (including circumstances in which the provisions of Articles 66 and 67-2 apply mutatis mutandis), the same applies hereinafter) must submit an application form containing the information specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order to the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
第四章　建築協定
Chapter IV Building Agreement
（建築協定の目的）
(Purpose of Building Agreement)
第六十九条　市町村は、その区域の一部について、住宅地としての環境又は商店街としての利便を高度に維持増進する等建築物の利用を増進し、かつ、土地の環境を改善するために必要と認める場合においては、土地の所有者及び借地権を有する者（土地区画整理法第九十八条第一項（大都市地域における住宅及び住宅地の供給の促進に関する特別措置法第八十三条において準用する場合を含む。次条第三項、第七十四条の二第一項及び第二項並びに第七十五条の二第一項、第二項及び第五項において同じ。）の規定により仮換地として指定された土地にあつては、当該土地に対応する従前の土地の所有者及び借地権を有する者。以下「土地の所有者等」と総称する。）が当該土地について一定の区域を定め、その区域内における建築物の敷地、位置、構造、用途、形態、意匠又は建築設備に関する基準についての協定（以下「建築協定」という。）を締結することができる旨を、条例で、定めることができる。
Article 69  When a municipality, with respect to a part of its area, deems it necessary for the purpose of promoting the utilization of buildings by effectively maintaining and improving the environment of a residential area or the convenience of a commercial area as well as for the purpose of improving the surrounding area, it may provide by ordinances that landowners and those of which have superficies or leases (in the case of land designated as provisionally replotted pursuant to the provisions of Article 98, paragraph (1) of the Land Readjustment Act (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 83 of the Act on Special Measures concerning Promotion of Supply of Houses and Housing Lands in Urban Districts; the same in paragraph (3) of the following Article, Article 74-2, paragraphs (1) and (2); and Article 75-2, paragraphs (1), (2), and (5)), previous landowners and persons with leases to the concerned land; hereinafter collectively referred to as "landowners, etc.") may specify a certain area on the land concerned and make an agreement (hereinafter referred to as a "building agreement") on criteria for the site, location, construction, use, form, design or building equipment of buildings within the area.
（建築協定の認可の申請）
(Application for Validation of Building Agreements)
第七十条　前条の規定による建築協定を締結しようとする土地の所有者等は、協定の目的となつている土地の区域（以下「建築協定区域」という。）、建築物に関する基準、協定の有効期間及び協定違反があつた場合の措置を定めた建築協定書を作成し、その代表者によつて、これを特定行政庁に提出し、その認可を受けなければならない。
Article 70  (1) Any landowner, etc. intending to make a building agreement under the preceding Article shall prepare a written building agreement stating therein the area of the land subject to the agreement (hereinafter referred to as a "building agreement area"), standards for buildings, effective period of the agreement and measures against breaches of the agreement and must have one's representative submit it to the Designated Administrative Agency to obtain validation therefrom.
２　前項の建築協定書においては、同項に規定するもののほか、前条の条例で定める区域内の土地のうち、建築協定区域に隣接した土地であつて、建築協定区域の一部とすることにより建築物の利用の増進及び土地の環境の改善に資するものとして建築協定区域の土地となることを当該建築協定区域内の土地の所有者等が希望するもの（以下「建築協定区域隣接地」という。）を定めることができる。
(2) In addition to the provisions specified in the preceding paragraph, the landowners, etc. of the building agreement area concerned may specify the desired land in the area specified by ordinances under the preceding Article, which adjoins the building agreement area, to make it a part of the building agreement area as it promotes utilization of the buildings and improves the environment of the land (hereinafter referred to as "land adjoining the building agreement area") in a written building agreement mentioned in the preceding paragraph:
３　第一項の建築協定書については、土地の所有者等の全員の合意がなければならない。ただし、当該建築協定区域内の土地（土地区画整理法第九十八条第一項の規定により仮換地として指定された土地にあつては、当該土地に対応する従前の土地）に借地権の目的となつている土地がある場合においては、当該借地権の目的となつている土地の所有者以外の土地の所有者等の全員の合意があれば足りる。
(3) A written building agreement as specified in paragraph (1) must be prepared based on the agreement of all parties of the landowners, etc. Provided, however, that if there is land which is under lease in the land in the building agreement area concerned (in the case of land designated as provisionally replotted land pursuant to the provisions of Article 98, paragraph (1) of the Land Readjustment Act, previous land which corresponds to the land concerned), it is sufficient that the agreement of all parties of the landowners, etc. other than the landowner of the land which is under lease is obtained.
４　第一項の規定によつて建築協定書を提出する場合において、当該建築協定区域が建築主事を置く市町村の区域外にあるときは、その所在地の市町村の長を経由しなければならない。
(4) If, if a building agreement is submitted under paragraph (1), the building agreement area concerned is outside a municipality having building officials, it must be submitted through the head of the municipality where the area is located.
（申請に係る建築協定の公告）
(Public Notice of Building Agreements under Application)
第七十一条　市町村の長は、前条第一項又は第四項の規定による建築協定書の提出があつた場合においては、遅滞なく、その旨を公告し、二十日以上の相当の期間を定めて、これを関係人の縦覧に供さなければならない。
Article 71  When a written building agreement has been submitted under paragraph (1) or (4) of the preceding Article, the head of the municipality must give public notice to that effect without delay, and offer it for inspection by the parties concerned for a reasonable period of time, not less than twenty days.
（公開による意見の聴取）
(Public Hearings)
第七十二条　市町村の長は、前条の縦覧期間の満了後、関係人の出頭を求めて公開による意見の聴取を行わなければならない。
Article 72  (1) The head of a municipality shall, after the expiration of the inspection period mentioned in the preceding Article, hold a public hearing to request the presence of the parties concerned.
２　建築主事を置く市町村以外の市町村の長は、前項の意見の聴取をした後、遅滞なく、当該建築協定書を、同項の規定による意見の聴取の記録を添えて、都道府県知事に送付しなければならない。この場合において、当該市町村の長は、当該建築協定書の内容について意見があるときは、その意見を付さなければならない。
(2) The head of a municipality not having building officials must forward the written building relevant agreement, along with the record of the hearing mentioned under that paragraph, to the prefectural governor, after a hearing held under the preceding paragraph, and without delay. In this case, when the relevant head of a municipality holds opinions with regard to the contents of the relevant written building agreement, the relevant head of a municipality shall attach the relevant opinions.
（建築協定の認可）
(Validation of Building Agreements)
第七十三条　特定行政庁は、当該建築協定の認可の申請が、次に掲げる条件に該当するときは、当該建築協定を認可しなければならない。
Article 73  (1) If a request for validation of a building agreement comes under the following conditions, the Designated Administrative Agency must validate the building agreement concerned:
一　建築協定の目的となつている土地又は建築物の利用を不当に制限するものでないこと。
(i) it does not improperly restrict the utilization of the land or building that is under the building agreement;
二　第六十九条の目的に合致するものであること。
(ii) it conforms to the purpose of Article 69;
三　建築協定において建築協定区域隣接地を定める場合には、その区域の境界が明確に定められていることその他の建築協定区域隣接地について国土交通省令で定める基準に適合するものであること。
(iii) in the case of a building agreement that specifies land adjoining the building agreement area, it shall clearly define the boundaries of this area and in addition, shall conform to other criteria specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order concerning land adjoining the building agreement area.
２　特定行政庁は、前項の認可をした場合においては、遅滞なく、その旨を公告しなければならない。この場合において、当該建築協定が建築主事を置く市町村の区域外の区域に係るものであるときは、都道府県知事は、その認可した建築協定に係る建築協定書の写し一通を当該建築協定区域及び建築協定区域隣接地の所在地の市町村の長に送付しなければならない。
(2) When the Designated Administrative Agency has rendered the validation under the preceding paragraph, it must give public notice to that effect without delay. In this case, if a building agreement concerns an area outside a municipality having building officials, the prefectural governor must send a copy of the validated building agreement to the head of the municipality where the building agreement area and the land adjoining the building agreement area concerned are located.
３　第一項の規定による認可をした市町村の長又は前項の規定によつて建築協定書の写の送付を受けた市町村の長は、その建築協定書を当該市町村の事務所に備えて、一般の縦覧に供さなければならない。
(3) The head of the municipality that has validated a building agreement under paragraph (1) or that has received a copy of the validated building agreement under the preceding paragraph must offer the validated building agreement for public inspection by keeping it in the office of the relevant municipality.
（建築協定の変更）
(Modification of Building Agreements)
第七十四条　建築協定区域内における土地の所有者等（当該建築協定の効力が及ばない者を除く。）は、前条第一項の規定による認可を受けた建築協定に係る建築協定区域、建築物に関する基準、有効期間、協定違反があつた場合の措置又は建築協定区域隣接地を変更しようとする場合においては、その旨を定め、これを特定行政庁に申請してその認可を受けなければならない。
Article 74  (1) When landowners, etc. of land within building agreement areas (excluding those not subject to the building agreement concerned) intend to modify the building agreement area, criteria for buildings, effective periods, measures against breaches, or land adjoining the building agreement area in a building agreement that has been validated under paragraph (1) of the preceding Article, they must establish to that effect and submit an application therefor to the Designated Administrative Agency to obtain validation therefrom.
２　前四条の規定は、前項の認可の手続に準用する。
(2) The provisions of the preceding four Articles shall apply mutatis mutandis to the procedure of validation under the preceding paragraph.
第七十四条の二　建築協定区域内の土地（土地区画整理法第九十八条第一項の規定により仮換地として指定された土地にあつては、当該土地に対応する従前の土地）で当該建築協定の効力が及ばない者の所有するものの全部又は一部について借地権が消滅した場合においては、その借地権の目的となつていた土地（同項の規定により仮換地として指定された土地に対応する従前の土地にあつては、当該土地についての仮換地として指定された土地）は、当該建築協定区域から除かれるものとする。
Article 74-2  (1) If a lease has terminated with respect to the whole or part of land which is located in a building agreement area (in the case of land designated as provisionally replotted land pursuant to the provisions of Article 98, paragraph (1) of the Land Readjustment Act, previous land which corresponds to the land concerned) but is owned by a person or parties that are not subject to the building agreement concerned, the land having been under lease (in the case of previous land corresponding to the land designated as provisionally replotted land pursuant to the provisions of that paragraph, land designated as provisionally replotted land for the land concerned) shall be excluded from the relevant building agreement area.
２　建築協定区域内の土地で土地区画整理法第九十八条第一項の規定により仮換地として指定されたものが、同法第八十六条第一項の換地計画又は大都市地域における住宅及び住宅地の供給の促進に関する特別措置法第七十二条第一項の換地計画において当該土地に対応する従前の土地についての換地として定められず、かつ、土地区画整理法第九十一条第三項（大都市地域における住宅及び住宅地の供給の促進に関する特別措置法第八十二条において準用する場合を含む。）の規定により当該土地に対応する従前の土地の所有者に対してその共有持分を与えるように定められた土地としても定められなかつたときは、当該土地は、土地区画整理法第百三条第四項（大都市地域における住宅及び住宅地の供給の促進に関する特別措置法第八十三条において準用する場合を含む。）の公告があつた日が終了した時において当該建築協定区域から除かれるものとする。
(2) If land within a building agreement area that was designated as provisionally replotted land pursuant to the provisions of Article 98, paragraph (1) of the Land Readjustment Act has not been specified as replotted land of previous land corresponding to the land concerned under the replotting plan in Article 86, paragraph (1) of the same Act or the replotting plan in Article 72, paragraph (1) of the Act on Special Measures concerning Promotion of Supply of Houses and Housing Lands in Urban Districts, and further, has not been specified as land given a share of joint ownership to the owner of the previous land corresponding to the land concerned pursuant to the provisions of Article 91, paragraph (3) of the Land Readjustment Act (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 82 of the Act on Special Measures concerning Promotion of Supply of Houses and Housing Lands in Urban Districts), the land concerned shall be excluded from the building agreement area after the day of the public notice in Article 103, paragraph (4) of the Land Readjustment Act (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 83 of the Act on Special Measures concerning Promotion of Supply of Houses and Housing Lands in Urban Districts).
３　前二項の場合においては、当該借地権を有していた者又は当該仮換地として指定されていた土地に対応する従前の土地に係る土地の所有者等（当該建築協定の効力が及ばない者を除く。）は、遅滞なく、その旨を特定行政庁に届け出なければならない。
(3) In the case of the preceding two paragraphs, the person with the lease concerned or the landowner, etc. of the land concerned with the previous land corresponding to the land designated as the provisionally replotted land concerned (excluding those not subject to the relevant building agreement) must notify the Designated Administrative Agency of that fact without delay.
４　特定行政庁は、前項の規定による届出があつた場合その他第一項又は第二項の規定により建築協定区域内の土地が当該建築協定区域から除かれたことを知つた場合においては、遅滞なく、その旨を公告しなければならない。
(4) When the Designated Administrative Agency has been notified under the preceding paragraph, or where it has become aware of the fact that land within the building agreement area has been excluded from the relevant building agreement area pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (1) or (2), it must give public notice to that effect without delay.
（建築協定の効力）
(Effect of Building Agreements)
第七十五条　第七十三条第二項又はこれを準用する第七十四条第二項の規定による認可の公告（次条において「建築協定の認可等の公告」という。）のあつた建築協定は、その公告のあつた日以後において当該建築協定区域内の土地の所有者等となつた者（当該建築協定について第七十条第三項又はこれを準用する第七十四条第二項の規定による合意をしなかつた者の有する土地の所有権を承継した者を除く。）に対しても、その効力があるものとする。
Article 75  A building agreement of which validation has been announced through a public notice (referred to in the next Article as a "public notice of validation, etc. of the building agreement") under Article 73, paragraph (2) or Article 74, paragraph (2) where Article 73, paragraph (2) applies mutatis mutandis shall be effective even to those who become a landowner, etc. (excluding those who have succeeded to the ownership of the land owned by those who did not give the consent under Article 70, paragraph (3) or Article 74, paragraph (2) where Article 70, paragraph (3) applies mutatis mutandis) of the land within the building agreement area concerned on or after the day of t public notice.
（建築協定の認可等の公告のあつた日以後建築協定に加わる手続等）
(Procedures of Participating in Building Agreements on or after the Day of Public Notice of Validation of Building Agreement)
第七十五条の二　建築協定区域内の土地の所有者（土地区画整理法第九十八条第一項の規定により仮換地として指定された土地にあつては、当該土地に対応する従前の土地の所有者）で当該建築協定の効力が及ばないものは、建築協定の認可等の公告のあつた日以後いつでも、特定行政庁に対して書面でその意思を表示することによつて、当該建築協定に加わることができる。
Article 75-2  (1) A landowner within a building agreement area (in the case of land designated as provisionally replotted land pursuant to the provisions of Article 98, paragraph (1) of the Land Readjustment Act, owner of the previous land which corresponds to the relevant land) that is not subject to the building agreement may, at any time on or after the day of public notice of validation, etc. of the building agreement, participate in the building agreement by declaring that landowner's intention in writing to the Designated Administrative Agency.
２　建築協定区域隣接地の区域内の土地に係る土地の所有者等は、建築協定の認可等の公告のあつた日以後いつでも、当該土地に係る土地の所有者等の全員の合意により、特定行政庁に対して書面でその意思を表示することによつて、建築協定に加わることができる。ただし、当該土地（土地区画整理法第九十八条第一項の規定により仮換地として指定された土地にあつては、当該土地に対応する従前の土地）の区域内に借地権の目的となつている土地がある場合においては、当該借地権の目的となつている土地の所有者以外の土地の所有者等の全員の合意があれば足りる。
(2) The landowner, etc. of land within the land adjoining the building agreement area may participate in the building agreement with the agreement of all the landowners, etc. for the relevant land by declaring of which intention in writing to the Designated Administrative Agency, at any time on or after the day of public notice of validation, etc. of the building agreement. Provided, however, that if there is land which is under lease in the area of the relevant land (in the case of land designated as provisionally replotted land pursuant to the provisions of Article 98, paragraph (1) of the Land Readjustment Act, previous land which corresponds to the relevant land), it is sufficient that the agreement of all parties of the landowners, etc. other than the landowner of the land which is under lease is obtained.
３　建築協定区域隣接地の区域内の土地に係る土地の所有者等で前項の意思を表示したものに係る土地の区域は、その意思の表示があつた時以後、建築協定区域の一部となるものとする。
(3) The area within the land adjoining the building agreement area and declared by the landowners, etc. under the preceding paragraph shall become part of the building agreement area after the declaration.
４　第七十三条第二項及び第三項の規定は、第一項又は第二項の規定による意思の表示があつた場合に準用する。
(4) The provisions of Article 73, paragraphs (2) and (3) shall apply mutatis mutandis if intention under paragraph (1) or (2) has been declared.
５　建築協定は、第一項又は第二項の規定により当該建築協定に加わつた者がその時において所有し、又は借地権を有していた当該建築協定区域内の土地（土地区画整理法第九十八条第一項の規定により仮換地として指定された土地にあつては、当該土地に対応する従前の土地）について、前項において準用する第七十三条第二項の規定による公告のあつた日以後において土地の所有者等となつた者（当該建築協定について第二項の規定による合意をしなかつた者の有する土地の所有権を承継した者及び前条の規定の適用がある者を除く。）に対しても、その効力があるものとする。
(5) With respect to that land within a building agreement area as is owned or is leased by a later participant in the building agreement pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (1) or (2) at the time of that person's participation (in the case of land designated as provisionally replotted land pursuant to the provisions of Article 98, paragraph (1) of the Land Readjustment Act, previous land which corresponds to the land concerned), the building agreement concerned shall be effective even to those who become a landowner, etc. (excluding those who have inherited ownership of land owned by a person who did not agree under paragraph (2) regarding the building agreement concerned and those to whom the provisions referred to in the preceding Article apply) of the relevant land on or after the day of public notice under Article 73, paragraph (2) as applied mutatis mutandis in the preceding paragraph.
（建築協定の廃止）
(Abolition of Building Agreements)
第七十六条　建築協定区域内の土地の所有者等（当該建築協定の効力が及ばない者を除く。）は、第七十三条第一項の規定による認可を受けた建築協定を廃止しようとする場合においては、その過半数の合意をもつてその旨を定め、これを特定行政庁に申請してその認可を受けなければならない。
Article 76  (1) When the landowners, etc. (excluding those to whom the building agreement concerned is not effective) of land within a building agreement area intend to abolish a building agreement that has been validated under Article 73, paragraph (1), they must establish to that effect with the consent of their majority and must submit an application for that abolition to the Designated Administrative Agency to obtain validation therefrom.
２　特定行政庁は、前項の認可をした場合においては、遅滞なく、その旨を公告しなければならない。
(2) When the Designated Administrative Agency has rendered the validation under the preceding paragraph, it must give public notice to that effect without delay.
（土地の共有者等の取扱い）
(Treatment of Co-owners of Land)
第七十六条の二　土地の共有者又は共同借地権者は、第七十条第三項（第七十四条第二項において準用する場合を含む。）、第七十五条の二第一項及び第二項並びに前条第一項の規定の適用については、合わせて一の所有者又は借地権者とみなす。
Article 76-2  Co-owners or co-lessees of land shall be considered to be one owner or one lessee in applying the provisions referred to in Article 70, paragraph (3) (including cases where this paragraph applies mutatis mutandis in Article 74, paragraph (2)), Article 75-2, paragraphs (1) and (2), and paragraph (1) of the preceding Article.
（建築協定の設定の特則）
(Special Rules regarding the Establishment of Building Agreements)
第七十六条の三　第六十九条の条例で定める区域内における土地で、一の所有者以外に土地の所有者等が存しないものの所有者は、当該土地の区域を建築協定区域とする建築協定を定めることができる。
Article 76-3  (1) The owner of land within areas designated by ordinances under Article 69, of which no landowner, etc. exists other than the one landowner may establish a building agreement of which building agreement area is the area of the relevant land.
２　前項の規定による建築協定を定めようとする者は、建築協定区域、建築物に関する基準、協定の有効期間及び協定違反があつた場合の措置を定めた建築協定書を作成し、これを特定行政庁に提出して、その認可を受けなければならない。
(2) A person who intend to establish a building agreement under the preceding paragraph must prepare a written building agreement stating therein the building agreement area, standards for buildings, effective period of the agreement, and measures against breaches of the agreement, and submit it to the Designated Administrative Agency, to obtain validation therefrom.
３　前項の建築協定書においては、同項に規定するもののほか、建築協定区域隣接地を定めることができる。
(3) In a written building agreement specified in the preceding paragraph, land adjoining the building agreement area may be specified in addition to the items specified in that paragraph.
４　第七十条第四項及び第七十一条から第七十三条までの規定は、第二項の認可の手続に準用する。
(4) The provisions of Article 70, paragraph (4) and Articles (71) through (73) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the procedure for validation under paragraph (2).
５　第二項の規定による認可を受けた建築協定は、認可の日から起算して三年以内において当該建築協定区域内の土地に二以上の土地の所有者等が存することとなつた時から、第七十三条第二項の規定による認可の公告のあつた建築協定と同一の効力を有する建築協定となる。
(5) A building agreement validated under paragraph (2) shall become a building agreement having the same effects as those of a building agreement of which validation has been announced through a public notice under Article 73, paragraph (2) when two or more landowners, etc. have come to exist for land in the building agreement area concerned within three years from the day of validation.
６　第七十四条及び第七十六条の規定は、前項の規定により第七十三条第二項の規定による認可の公告のあつた建築協定と同一の効力を有する建築協定となつた建築協定の変更又は廃止について準用する。
(6) The provisions of Article 74 and Article 76 shall apply mutatis mutandis to alteration or abolition of any building agreement which, pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph, has become a building agreement having the same effects as those of a building agreement of which validation has been announced through a public notice under Article 73, paragraph (2).
（建築物の借主の地位）
(Status of Lessees of Buildings)
第七十七条　建築協定の目的となつている建築物に関する基準が建築物の借主の権限に係る場合においては、その建築協定については、当該建築物の借主は、土地の所有者等とみなす。
Article 77  If standards for buildings as stated in a building agreement pertain to the rights of lessees of those buildings, the lessees of the relevant buildings shall be considered to be members of the landowners, etc. concerned.
第四章の二　指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関等
Chapter IV-2 Designated Qualifying Examination Body for Qualified Building Regulation Conformity Inspectors
第一節　指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関
Section 1 Designated Qualifying Examination Body for Qualified Building Regulation Conformity Inspectors
（指定）
(Designation)
第七十七条の二　第五条の二第一項の規定による指定は、一を限り、建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務を行おうとする者の申請により行う。
Article 77-2  Designation under Article 5-2, paragraph (1) shall be provided to one organization in response to an application by an organization wishing to perform the qualifying examination affairs for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors.
（欠格条項）
(Disqualification)
第七十七条の三　次の各号のいずれかに該当する者は、第五条の二第一項の規定による指定を受けることができない。
Article 77-3  A person coming under any of the following items is not qualified for the designation under Article 5-2, paragraph (1):
一　一般社団法人又は一般財団法人以外の者
(i) a person other than a general incorporated association or general incorporated foundation;
二　建築基準法令の規定により刑に処せられ、その執行を終わり、又は執行を受けることがなくなつた日から起算して二年を経過しない者
(ii) a person who has been sentenced to punishment pursuant to the provisions of building standard laws and regulations, and for whom two years have not yet elapsed since the date on which relevant execution has been completed or has become no longer subject to execution;
三　第七十七条の十五第一項又は第二項の規定により指定を取り消され、その取消しの日から起算して二年を経過しない者
(iii) a person whose designation was revoked pursuant to the provisions of Article 77-15, paragraph (1) or (2), and for whom two years have not yet elapsed since the date of the relevant revocation;
四　その役員のうちに、イ又はロのいずれかに該当する者がある者
(iv) a person whose executives include a person that comes under the following (a) or (b);
イ　第二号に該当する者
(a) a person coming under item (ii);
ロ　第七十七条の六第二項の規定による命令により解任され、その解任の日から起算して二年を経過しない者
(b) a person dismissed by order under Article 77-6, paragraph (2), and for whom two years have not yet elapsed since the date of the relevant revocation.
（指定の基準）
(Designation Criteria)
第七十七条の四　国土交通大臣は、第五条の二第一項の規定による指定の申請が次に掲げる基準に適合していると認めるときでなければ、その指定をしてはならない。
Article 77-4  The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism shall not designate the qualifying examination body unless it is confirmed that an application for designation under Article 5-2, paragraph (1) conforms to the following criteria:
一　職員（第七十七条の七第一項の建築基準適合判定資格者検定委員を含む。）、設備、建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務の実施の方法その他の事項についての建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務の実施に関する計画が、建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務の適確な実施のために適切なものであること。
(i) a plan for the implementation of qualifying examination affairs for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors concerning staff (including examiners for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors in Article 77-7, paragraph (1)), facilities, methods of the implementation and other matters, shall be appropriate for the proper performance of the relevant work;
二　前号の建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務の実施に関する計画を適確に実施するに足りる経理的及び技術的な基礎を有するものであること。
(ii) the applicant shall have sufficient funds and technical capabilities for the proper execution of the plans for the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors in the preceding item;
三　建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務以外の業務を行つている場合には、その業務を行うことによつて建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務の公正な実施に支障を及ぼすおそれがないものであること。
(iii) if the applicant performs work other than the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors) the neutrality and independence of the relevant administrative work shall not be compromised.
（指定の公示等）
(Public Notice of Designation)
第七十七条の五　国土交通大臣は、第五条の二第一項の規定による指定をしたときは、指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関の名称及び住所、建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務を行う事務所の所在地並びに建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務の開始の日を公示しなければならない。
Article 77-5  (1) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism has made a designation under Article 5-2, paragraph (1), the Minister must publicly notify of the name and address of the designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors, the address of the office handling qualifying examination affairs for the qualifying examination for building regulation conformity inspectors will be performed, and the day the affairs starts.
２　指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関は、その名称若しくは住所又は建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務を行う事務所の所在地を変更しようとするときは、変更しようとする日の二週間前までに、その旨を国土交通大臣に届け出なければならない。
(2) When the designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors changes its name, address, or the address of the office where the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors is performed, it must notify the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism to that effect at least two weeks prior to the day of the relevant change.
３　国土交通大臣は、前項の規定による届出があつたときは、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(3) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism receives the notification under the preceding paragraph, the Minister must publicly notify to that effect.
（役員の選任及び解任）
(Appointment and Dismissal of Directors)
第七十七条の六　指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関の役員の選任及び解任は、国土交通大臣の認可を受けなければ、その効力を生じない。
Article 77-6  (1) The appointment or dismissal of a director of the designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors shall not take effect without the approval of the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism.
２　国土交通大臣は、指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関の役員が、第七十七条の九第一項の認可を受けた建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務規程に違反したとき、又は建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務に関し著しく不適当な行為をしたときは、指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関に対し、その役員を解任すべきことを命ずることができる。
(2) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may order the designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors to dismiss a director if the director violates the regulations for the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors as approved under Article 77-9, paragraph (1) or acts very inappropriately in connection with the affairs.
（建築基準適合判定資格者検定委員）
(Examiners for Qualified Building Regulation Conformity Inspectors)
第七十七条の七　指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関は、建築基準適合判定資格者検定の問題の作成及び採点を建築基準適合判定資格者検定委員に行わせなければならない。
Article 77-7  (1) The designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors must have its examiners prepare and score examination papers for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors.
２　建築基準適合判定資格者検定委員は、建築及び行政に関し学識経験のある者のうちから選任しなければならない。
(2) Examiners for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors must be appointed from among people with sufficient knowledge and experience in construction and administration.
３　指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関は、建築基準適合判定資格者検定委員を選任し、又は解任したときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、その旨を国土交通大臣に届け出なければならない。
(3) When the designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors appoints or dismisses examiners for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, it must notify the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism to that effect.
４　国土交通大臣は、建築基準適合判定資格者検定委員が、第七十七条の九第一項の認可を受けた建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務規程に違反したとき、又は建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務に関し著しく不適当な行為をしたときは、指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関に対し、その建築基準適合判定資格者検定委員を解任すべきことを命ずることができる。
(4) When an examiner for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors violates the rules of the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors as approved under Article 77-9, paragraph (1) or acts very inappropriately in connection with the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors, the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may order the designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors to dismiss the examiner.
（秘密保持義務等）
(Obligation to Maintain Confidentiality)
第七十七条の八　指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関の役員及び職員（建築基準適合判定資格者検定委員を含む。第三項において同じ。）並びにこれらの職にあつた者は、建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務に関して知り得た秘密を漏らしてはならない。
Article 77-8  (1) Directors and staff of the designated qualifying examination body for building regulation conformity inspectors (including examiners for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors; the same in paragraph (3)), and any person who was in those positions shall not reveal any confidential information obtained in connection with the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors.
２　前項に定めるもののほか、建築基準適合判定資格者検定委員は、建築基準適合判定資格者検定の問題の作成及び採点に当たつて、厳正を保持し不正な行為のないようにしなければならない。
(2) In addition to the provisions specified in the preceding paragraph, the examiners for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors must prepare and score examination papers for qualifying examinations for building regulation conformity inspectors in a fair and strict manner.
３　建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務に従事する指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関の役員及び職員は、刑法（明治四十年法律第四十五号）その他の罰則の適用については、法令により公務に従事する職員とみなす。
(3) Regarding application of the Penal Code (Act No. 45 of 1907) and other penal codes, the directors and staff of the designated qualifying examination body for qualified for building regulation conformity inspectors performing the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors shall be considered to be government employees engaged in public services by laws and orders.
（建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務規程）
(Rules of Qualifying Examination Affairs for the Qualifying Examination for Building Regulation Conformity Inspectors)
第七十七条の九　指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関は、建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務の実施に関する規程（以下この節において「建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務規程」という。）を定め、国土交通大臣の認可を受けなければならない。これを変更しようとするときも、同様とする。
Article 77-9  (1) The designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors shall establish rules of qualifying examination affairs for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors (referred to in this Section as "rules of qualifying examination affairs for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors"), and must obtain the approval of the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism. The same shall apply when the relevant regulations are to be revised.
２　建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務規程で定めるべき事項は、国土交通省令で定める。
(2) Items to be established by the rules of qualifying examination affairs for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors shall be specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
３　国土交通大臣は、第一項の認可をした建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務規程が建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務の公正かつ適確な実施上不適当となつたと認めるときは、その建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務規程を変更すべきことを命ずることができる。
(3) If the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism finds that the rules of qualifying examination affairs for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors approved under paragraph (1) have become no longer appropriate for the impartial and correct performance of the qualifying examination affairs for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors, the Minister may order the revision of the rules of qualifying examination affairs for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors.
（事業計画等）
(Business Plan)
第七十七条の十　指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関は、毎事業年度、事業計画及び収支予算を作成し、当該事業年度の開始前に（指定を受けた日の属する事業年度にあつては、その指定を受けた後遅滞なく）、国土交通大臣の認可を受けなければならない。これを変更しようとするときも、同様とする。
Article 77-10  (1) The designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors shall prepare a business plan and a budget for income and expenditure for each business year, and must obtain the approval of the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism prior to the beginning of the relevant business year (or immediately after designation for a business year in which the designation takes effect). The same shall apply when the relevant plan or budget is to be revised.
２　指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関は、毎事業年度、事業報告書及び収支決算書を作成し、当該事業年度の終了後三月以内に国土交通大臣に提出しなければならない。
(2) The designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors must prepare a business report and a financial report for each business year and submit these reports to the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism within three months after the end of the relevant business year.
（帳簿の備付け等）
(Bookkeeping)
第七十七条の十一　指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務に関する事項で国土交通省令で定めるものを記載した帳簿を備え付け、これを保存しなければならない。
Article 77-11  The designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors must prepare and keep a book which records items concerning the qualifying examination affairs for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（監督命令）
(Ministerial Orders)
第七十七条の十二　国土交通大臣は、建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務の公正かつ適確な実施を確保するため必要があると認めるときは、指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関に対し、建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務に関し監督上必要な命令をすることができる。
Article 77-12  If the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism finds it necessary to ensure the impartial and correct performance of the qualifying examination affairs for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors, the Minister may issue to designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors an order necessary for supervision of the qualifying examination affairs for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors.
（報告、検査等）
(Reporting and Inspections)
第七十七条の十三　国土交通大臣は、建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務の公正かつ適確な実施を確保するため必要があると認めるときは、指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関に対し建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務に関し必要な報告を求め、又はその職員に、指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関の事務所に立ち入り、建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務の状況若しくは設備、帳簿、書類その他の物件を検査させ、若しくは関係者に質問させることができる。
Article 77-13  (1) If the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism finds it necessary to ensure the impartial and correct performance of the qualifying examination affairs for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors, the Minister may request required reports for the qualifying examination affairs for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors to the designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors, or to have its officials enter the office of the body to inspect the state of the qualifying examination affairs for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors, or the facilities, the books, documents, and other objects, or to question related persons.
２　第十五条の二第二項及び第三項の規定は、前項の場合について準用する。
(2) The provisions of Article 15-2, paragraphs (2) and (3) shall apply mutatis mutandis in the preceding paragraph.
（建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務の休廃止等）
(Suspension and Abandonment of Qualifying Examination Affairs for Qualified Building Regulation Conformity Inspectors)
第七十七条の十四　指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関は、国土交通大臣の許可を受けなければ、建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務の全部又は一部を休止し、又は廃止してはならない。
Article 77-14  (1) The designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors shall not suspend or abandon all or part of its the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors, without obtaining the prior permission of the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism.
２　国土交通大臣が前項の規定により建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務の全部の廃止を許可したときは、当該許可に係る指定は、その効力を失う。
(2) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism has permitted abandonment of all of the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the designation of the body that obtained the relevant permission shall cease to be effective.
３　国土交通大臣は、第一項の許可をしたときは、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(3) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism has given permission under paragraph (1), the Minister must publicly notify to that effect.
（指定の取消し等）
(Revocation of Designation)
第七十七条の十五　国土交通大臣は、指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関が第七十七条の三第一号、第二号又は第四号のいずれかに該当するに至つたときは、その指定を取り消さなければならない。
Article 77-15  (1) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism must revoke the designation of the designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors when it comes under any of the provisions in Article 77-3, item (i), (ii) or (iv):
２　国土交通大臣は、指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関が次の各号のいずれかに該当するときは、その指定を取り消し、又は期間を定めて建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務の全部若しくは一部の停止を命ずることができる。
(2) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may revoke that designation or order the suspension of all or part of the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors for a specified period of time, when the designation of the designated qualifying examination body falls under any of the following items:
一　第七十七条の五第二項、第七十七条の七第一項から第三項まで、第七十七条の十、第七十七条の十一又は前条第一項の規定に違反したとき。
(i) the body has violated the provisions of Article 77-5, paragraph (2); Article 77-7, paragraphs (1) through (3); Article 77-10; Article 77-11; or paragraph (1) of the preceding Article;
二　第七十七条の九第一項の認可を受けた建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務規程によらないで建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務を行つたとき。
(ii) the body has performed the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors not in accordance with the rules of qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors as approved under Article 77-9, paragraph (1);
三　第七十七条の六第二項、第七十七条の七第四項、第七十七条の九第三項又は第七十七条の十二の規定による命令に違反したとき。
(iii) the body has violated orders under Article 77-6, paragraph (2); Article 77-7, paragraph (4); Article 77-9, paragraph (3); or Article 77-12;
四　第七十七条の四各号に掲げる基準に適合していないと認めるとき。
(iv) it is concluded that the body does not conform to the criteria set forth in each item of Article 77-4;
五　その役員又は建築基準適合判定資格者検定委員が、建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務に関し著しく不適当な行為をしたとき。
(v) its director or examiner has acted very inappropriately in connection with the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors;
六　不正な手段により指定を受けたとき。
(vi) the body was designated by illegal means.
３　国土交通大臣は、前二項の規定により指定を取り消し、又は前項の規定により建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務の全部若しくは一部の停止を命じたときは、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(3) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism revokes the designation pursuant to the preceding two paragraphs or orders the partial or total suspension of the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the Minister must publicly notify to that effect.
（国土交通大臣による建築基準適合判定資格者検定の実施）
(Performance of Qualifying Examinations for Qualified Building Regulation Conformity Inspectors by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism)
第七十七条の十六　国土交通大臣は、指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関が第七十七条の十四第一項の規定により建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務の全部若しくは一部を休止したとき、前条第二項の規定により指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関に対し建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務の全部若しくは一部の停止を命じたとき、又は指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関が天災その他の事由により建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務の全部若しくは一部を実施することが困難となつた場合において必要があると認めるときは、第五条の二第三項の規定にかかわらず、建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務の全部又は一部を自ら行うものとする。
Article 77-16  (1) If the designated qualifying examination body for building regulation conformity inspectors has suspended all or part of its qualifying examination affairs for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors pursuant to the provisions of Article 77-14, paragraph (1), or the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism has ordered to suspend the affairs pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (2) of the preceding Article, or if the Minister finds it necessary when the body has difficulty to perform all or part of the affairs because of natural disaster or other uncontrollable factors,, the Minister performs all or part of the affairs irrespective of Article 5-2, paragraph (3).
２　国土交通大臣は、前項の規定により建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務を行い、又は同項の規定により行つている建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務を行わないこととしようとするときは、あらかじめ、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(2) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism performs the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph, or stops performing the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors pursuant to the provisions of that paragraph, the Minister must publicly notify to that effect in advance.
３　国土交通大臣が、第一項の規定により建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務を行うこととし、第七十七条の十四第一項の規定により建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務の廃止を許可し、又は前条第一項若しくは第二項の規定により指定を取り消した場合における建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務の引継ぎその他の必要な事項は、国土交通省令で定める。
(3) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism performs the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (1), or permits the abandonment of affairs pursuant to the provisions of Article 77-14, paragraph (1), or revokes the designation pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (1) or (2) of the preceding Article, succession of the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors and other necessary items shall be specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（審査請求）
(Investigation Demands)
第七十七条の十七　指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関が行う建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務に係る処分又はその不作為については、国土交通大臣に対し、審査請求をすることができる。この場合において、国土交通大臣は、行政不服審査法（平成二十六年法律第六十八号）第二十五条第二項及び第三項、第四十六条第一項及び第二項、第四十七条並びに第四十九条第三項の規定の適用については、指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関の上級行政庁とみなす。
Article 77-17  Investigation demands regarding actions or nonfeasance in connection with the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors performed by the designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors may be made to the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism In this case, the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism shall deem the designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors to be a higher administrative agency for the purposes of applying the provisions referred to in Article 25, paragraphs (2) and (3); Article 46, paragraphs (1) and (2); Article 47; and Article 49 paragraph (3) of the Administrative Appeal Act (Act No. 68 of 2014).
第一節の二　指定構造計算適合判定資格者検定機関
Section 1-2 Designated Qualifying Examination Body for Building Regulation Conformity Inspectors
第七十七条の十七の二　第五条の五第一項の規定による指定は、一を限り、構造計算適合判定資格者検定事務を行おうとする者の申請により行う。
Article 77-17-2  (1) Designation under Article 5-5, paragraph (1) shall be granted to one person that wishes to perform the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors.
２　第七十七条の三、第七十七条の四及び第七十七条の五第一項の規定は第五条の五第一項の規定による指定に、第七十七条の五第二項及び第三項並びに第七十七条の六から第七十七条の十六までの規定は指定構造計算適合判定資格者検定機関に、前条の規定は指定構造計算適合判定資格者検定機関が行う構造計算適合判定資格者検定事務について準用する。この場合において、第七十七条の十六第一項中「第五条の二第三項」とあるのは、「第五条の五第二項において準用する第五条の二第三項」と読み替えるものとする。
(2) The provisions of Article 77-3, Article 77-4, and Article 77-5, paragraph (1) shall apply to designation under Article 5-5, paragraph (1), the provisions of Article 77-5, paragraphs (2) and (3) and Articles 77-6 through 77-16 to the designated qualifying examination body for building regulation conformity inspectors, and the provisions of the preceding Article to the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors performed by the designated qualifying examination body for building regulation conformity inspectors, mutatis mutandis. In this case, "Article 5-2, paragraph (3)" in Article 77-16, paragraph (1) shall be read as "Article 5-2, paragraph (3) applied mutatis mutandis to Article 5-5, paragraph (2)".
第二節　指定確認検査機関
Section 2 Designated Confirmation and Inspection Bodies
（指定）
(Designation)
第七十七条の十八　第六条の二第一項（第八十七条第一項、第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第一項若しくは第二項において準用する場合を含む。以下この項において同じ。）又は第七条の二第一項（第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第一項若しくは第二項において準用する場合を含む。以下この項において同じ。）の規定による指定（以下この節において単に「指定」という。）は、第六条の二第一項の規定による確認又は第七条の二第一項及び第七条の四第一項（第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）の検査並びに第七条の六第一項第二号（第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第一項若しくは第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による認定（以下「確認検査」という。）の業務を行おうとする者の申請により行う。
Article 77-18  (1) The designation under Article 6-2, paragraph (1) (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (1), Article 87-2, or Article 88, paragraph (1) or (2); the same in this paragraph) or Article 7-2, paragraph (1) (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 87-2 or Article 88, paragraph (1) or (2); the same in this paragraph) (hereinafter in this Section referred to simply as "designation") shall be performed in response to an application by those wishing to perform the confirmations under Article 6-2 paragraph (1) or inspections under Article 7-2, paragraph (1) and Article 7-4, paragraph (1) (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 87-2, or Article 88, paragraph (1)) (hereinafter in this Section and Article 77-62, paragraph (2) and Chapter VII referred to as "confirmation and inspection"), or approvals under Article 7-6, paragraph (1), item (ii) (including cases in which the provisions of Article 87-4 or Article 88, paragraph (1) or (2) are applied mutatis mutandis).
２　前項の申請は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、国土交通省令で定める区分に従い、確認検査の業務を行う区域（以下この節において「業務区域」という。）を定めてしなければならない。
(2) The application provided for in the preceding paragraph provide the area where the confirmation and inspection work will be performed in accordance with classifications specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order (hereinafter in this Section referred to as "work area"), as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
３　国土交通大臣又は都道府県知事は、指定をしようとするときは、あらかじめ、業務区域を所轄する特定行政庁（都道府県知事にあつては、当該都道府県知事を除く。）の意見を聴かなければならない。
(3) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or the prefectural governor must hear the views of the Special Administrative Agency (in the case of the prefectural governor, excluding the relevant prefectural governor) with jurisdiction over the work area in advance, when a designation has been made.
（欠格条項）
(Disqualification)
第七十七条の十九　次の各号のいずれかに該当する者は、指定を受けることができない。
Article 77-19  A person coming under any of the following items is not qualified for designation:
一　未成年者
(i) a minor;
二　破産手続開始の決定を受けて復権を得ない者
(ii) a person that has been ordered to begin bankruptcy procedures and is unable to be reinstated;
三　禁錮以上の刑に処せられ、又は建築基準法令の規定により刑に処せられ、その執行を終わり、又は執行を受けることがなくなつた日から起算して五年を経過しない者
(iii) a person who has been sentenced to imprisonment or a higher penalty, or sentenced to punishment pursuant to the provisions of building standard laws and regulations, and for whom five years have not yet elapsed since the date on which relevant execution has been completed or has become no longer subject to execution;
四　第七十七条の三十五第一項又は第二項の規定により指定を取り消され、その取消しの日から起算して五年を経過しない者
(iv) a person whose designation has been revoked pursuant to the provisions of Article 77-35, paragraph (1) or (2), and for whom five years have not yet elapsed since the date of the revocation;
五　第七十七条の三十五の十九第二項の規定により第七十七条の三十五の二第一項に規定する指定を取り消され、その取消しの日から起算して五年を経過しない者
(v) a person whose designation under Article 77-35-2, paragraph (1) has been revoked pursuant to the provisions of Article 77-35-19, paragraph (2), and for whom five years have not yet elapsed since the date of the relevant revocation;
六　第七十七条の六十二第二項（第七十七条の六十六第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定により第七十七条の五十八第一項又は第七十七条の六十六第一項の登録を消除され、その消除の日から起算して五年を経過しない者
(vi) a person whose registration under Article 77-58, paragraph (1) or Article 77-66, paragraph (1) has been deleted pursuant to the provisions of Article 77-62, paragraph (2) (including the cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis under Article 77-66, paragraph (2)), and for whom five years have not yet elapsed since the date of the relevant deletion;
七　建築士法第七条第四号又は第二十三条の四第一項第三号に該当する者
(vii) a person coming under Article 7, item (iv) or Article 23-4, paragraph (1), item (iii) of the Act on Architects and Building Engineers;
八　公務員で懲戒免職の処分を受け、その処分の日から起算して三年を経過しない者
(viii) a government employee who has been subject to a disposition of disciplinary dismissal, and for whom three years have not yet elapsed since the date of the relevant disposition;
九　心身の故障により確認検査の業務を適正に行うことができない者として国土交通省令で定めるもの
(ix) a person who has been specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order as a person who is incapable of performing the confirmation and inspection work appropriately due to mental or physical incapacitation;
十　法人であつて、その役員のうちに前各号のいずれかに該当する者があるもの
(x) a corporation of which executives include a person that comes under any of the preceding items;
十一　その者の親会社等その者の経営を実質的に支配することが可能となる関係にあるものとして政令で定める者をいう。以下同じ。）が前各号のいずれかに該当する者
(xi) a person whose parent company, etc. (refers to a person specified by Cabinet Order as one in a relationship which permits it to actually control the management of this person; the same applies hereinafter) comes under any of the preceding items.
（指定の基準）
(Designation Criteria)
第七十七条の二十　国土交通大臣又は都道府県知事は、指定の申請が次に掲げる基準に適合していると認めるときでなければ、指定をしてはならない。
Article 77-20  The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or a prefectural governor shall not designate a confirmation and inspection body unless it is concluded that an application for the designation conforms to the following criteria:
一　第七十七条の二十四第一項の確認検査員（常勤の職員である者に限る。）の数が、確認検査を行おうとする建築物の種類、規模及び数に応じて国土交通省令で定める数以上であること。
(i) the number of private building inspectors specified in Article 77-24, paragraph (1) (limited to fulltime staff) shall be equal to or greater than a number specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order according to the type, scale, and number of the buildings subject to confirmation and inspection work;
二　前号に定めるもののほか、職員、確認検査の業務の実施の方法その他の事項についての確認検査の業務の実施に関する計画が、確認検査の業務の適確な実施のために適切なものであること。
(ii) in addition to the provisions of the preceding item, a plan for the implementation of confirmation and inspection work concerning staff, methods of the implementation, and other matters shall be appropriate for the proper performance of the relevant work;
三　その者の有する財産の評価額（その者が法人である場合にあつては、資本金、基本金その他これらに準ずるものの額）が国土交通省令で定める額以上であること。
(iii) the assessed value of assets of the applicant (in a case where the person is a corporation, capital, endowment, or other amount equivalent to these) shall be equal to or higher than an amount specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order;
四　前号に定めるもののほか、第二号の確認検査の業務の実施に関する計画を適確に実施するに足りる経理的基礎を有するものであること。
(iv) in addition to the provisions of the preceding item, the applicant shall have sufficient funds for the proper execution of the plans for the confirmation and inspection work in item (ii);
五　法人にあつては役員、法人の種類に応じて国土交通省令で定める構成員又は職員（第七十七条の二十四第一項の確認検査員を含む。以下この号において同じ。）の構成が、法人以外の者にあつてはその者及びその職員の構成が、確認検査の業務の公正な実施に支障を及ぼすおそれがないものであること。
(v) the composition of the members of the applicant, in the case of a corporation, the directors, members or staff specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order according to the type of the corporation, (including private building inspectors under Article 77-24, paragraph (1); the same in this item) in the case of a person other than a corporation, the applicant itself and its staff shall not compromise the neutrality and independence of the confirmation and inspection work;
六　その者又はその者の親会社等が第七十七条の三十五の五第一項の指定構造計算適合性判定機関である場合には、当該指定構造計算適合性判定機関に対してされた第十八条の二第四項の規定により読み替えて適用される第六条の三第一項の規定による構造計算適合性判定の申請に係る建築物の計画について、第六条の二第一項の規定による確認をしないものであること。
(vi) if the applicant or the applicant's parent company, etc., is a designated structural calculation conformity review body under the provisions of Article 77-35-5, paragraph (1), confirmation under Article 6-2, paragraph (1) will not be carried out in respect of plan for the buildings pertaining to applications for the structural calculation reviews under Article 6-3, paragraph (1), which are alternatively applied to the designated structural calculation conformity review body pursuant to the provisions of Article 18-2, paragraph (4);
七　前号に定めるもののほか、その者又はその者の親会社等が確認検査の業務以外の業務を行つている場合には、その業務を行うことによつて確認検査の業務の公正な実施に支障を及ぼすおそれがないものであること。
(vii) in addition to the provisions of the preceding items, if the applicant or the parent company, etc. of the applicant performs work other than confirmation and inspection work, the neutrality and independence of the confirmation and inspection work shall not be compromised;
八　前各号に定めるもののほか、確認検査の業務を行うにつき十分な適格性を有するものであること。
(viii) in addition to the provisions of the preceding items, the applicant shall be fully suitable for performing confirmation and inspection work.
（指定の公示等）
(Public Notice of Designations)
第七十七条の二十一　国土交通大臣又は都道府県知事は、指定をしたときは、指定を受けた者（以下「指定確認検査機関」という。）の名称及び住所、指定の区分、業務区域並びに確認検査の業務を行う事務所の所在地を公示しなければならない。
Article 77-21  (1) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or a prefectural governor has designated a confirmation and inspection body, the Minister or the governor must publicly notify of the name and address of the designated person (hereinafter referred to as a "designated confirmation and inspection body"), the classification of the designation, work area, and the address of the office performing the confirmation and inspection work.
２　指定確認検査機関は、その名称若しくは住所又は確認検査の業務を行う事務所の所在地を変更しようとするときは、変更しようとする日の二週間前までに、その指定をした国土交通大臣又は都道府県知事（以下この節において「国土交通大臣等」という。）にその旨を届け出なければならない。
(2) When a designated confirmation and inspection body changes its name, address, or the address of the office performing confirmation and inspection work, it must notify the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or the prefectural governor by whom it was designated (hereinafter in this Section referred to as "Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc.") to that effect at least two weeks prior to the day of the relevant change.
３　国土交通大臣等は、前項の規定による届出があつたときは、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(3) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc. receives the notification under the preceding paragraph, the Minister must publicly notify to that effect.
（業務区域の変更）
(Change in Work Area)
第七十七条の二十二　指定確認検査機関は、業務区域を増加しようとするときは、国土交通大臣等の認可を受けなければならない。
Article 77-22  (1) When a designated confirmation and inspection body expands its work area, it must obtain the approval of the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc.
２　指定確認検査機関は、業務区域を減少したときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、その旨を国土交通大臣等に届け出なければならない。
(2) When a designated confirmation and inspection body reduces the size of its work area, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, it must notify the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc. to that effect.
３　第七十七条の十八第三項及び第七十七条の二十第一号から第四号までの規定は、第一項の認可について準用する。この場合において、第七十七条の十八第三項中「業務区域」とあるのは、「増加しようとする業務区域」と読み替えるものとする。
(3) The provisions of Article 77-18, paragraph (3) and Article 77-20, items (i) through (iv) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the approval in paragraph (1). In this case, the term "work area" in Article 77-18, paragraph (3) shall be replaced with "work area that is to be expanded."
４　国土交通大臣等は、第一項の認可をしたとき又は第二項の規定による届出があつたときは、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(4) If the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc. gives any approval of paragraph (1), or a notification has been made under paragraph (2), the Minister must publicly notify to that effect.
（指定の更新）
(Renewal of Designation)
第七十七条の二十三　指定は、五年以上十年以内において政令で定める期間ごとにその更新を受けなければ、その期間の経過によつて、その効力を失う。
Article 77-23  (1) If a designation is not renewed at an interval from five to ten years specified by Cabinet Order, it shall cease to be effective.
２　第七十七条の十八から第七十七条の二十までの規定は、前項の指定の更新の場合について準用する。
(2) The provisions of Articles 77-18 through 77-20 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the renewal of designation specified in the preceding paragraph.
（確認検査員）
(Private Building Inspectors)
第七十七条の二十四　指定確認検査機関は、確認検査を行うときは、確認検査員に確認検査を実施させなければならない。
Article 77-24  (1) A designated confirmation and inspection body must have its private building inspectors perform confirmation and inspection work in accordance with a method specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
２　確認検査員は、第七十七条の五十八第一項の登録を受けた者のうちから、選任しなければならない。
(2) Private building inspectors must be appointed from among people registered under Article 77-58, paragraph (1).
３　指定確認検査機関は、確認検査員を選任し、又は解任したときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、その旨を国土交通大臣等に届け出なければならない。
(3) When a designated confirmation and inspection body appoint or dismisses a building inspector, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, it must notify the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc. of the appointment or dismissal of a private building inspector,
４　国土交通大臣等は、確認検査員の在任により指定確認検査機関が第七十七条の二十第五号に掲げる基準に適合しなくなつたときは、指定確認検査機関に対し、その確認検査員を解任すべきことを命ずることができる。
(4) When the designated confirmation and inspection body the designated confirmation and inspection body does not conform to the criteria set forth in Article 77-20, item (v) because of the relevant inspector, the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc. may order the body to dismiss a private building inspector.
（秘密保持義務等）
(Obligation to Maintain Confidentiality)
第七十七条の二十五　指定確認検査機関（その者が法人である場合にあつては、その役員。次項において同じ。）及びその職員（確認検査員を含む。次項において同じ。）並びにこれらの者であつた者は、確認検査の業務に関して知り得た秘密を漏らし、又は盗用してはならない。
Article 77-25  (1) A designated confirmation and inspection body (in the case of a corporation, directors; the same in the next paragraph), its staff (including private building inspectors; the same in the next paragraph) and any person who was in those positions shall not reveal any confidential information related to confirmation and inspection work, nor shall appropriate this confidential information.
２　指定確認検査機関及びその職員で確認検査の業務に従事するものは、刑法その他の罰則の適用については、法令により公務に従事する職員とみなす。
(2) Regarding the application of the Penal Code and other penal codes, a designated confirmation and inspection body and its staff performing confirmation and inspection work shall be considered to be government employees engaged in public services by laws and orders.
（確認検査の義務）
(Responsibility for Confirmation and Inspection)
第七十七条の二十六　指定確認検査機関は、確認検査を行うべきことを求められたときは、正当な理由がある場合を除き、遅滞なく、確認検査を行わなければならない。
Article 77-26  A designated confirmation and inspection body must immediately perform confirmation and inspection work upon request, excluding cases where there are justifiable grounds not to do so.
（確認検査業務規程）
(Regulations for Confirmation and Inspection Work)
第七十七条の二十七　指定確認検査機関は、確認検査の業務に関する規程（以下この節において「確認検査業務規程」という。）を定め、国土交通大臣等の認可を受けなければならない。これを変更しようとするときも、同様とする。
Article 77-27  (1) A designated confirmation and inspection body shall establish regulations concerning the performance of confirmation and inspection work (referred to in this Section as "regulations for confirmation and inspection work"), and must obtain the approval of the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc. The same shall apply when the relevant regulations are to be revised.
２　確認検査業務規程で定めるべき事項は、国土交通省令で定める。
(2) Items that shall be established by the regulations for confirmation and inspection work shall be specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
３　国土交通大臣等は、第一項の認可をした確認検査業務規程が確認検査の公正かつ適確な実施上不適当となつたと認めるときは、その確認検査業務規程を変更すべきことを命ずることができる。
(3) If the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc. finds that the rules of confirmation and inspection work approved under paragraph (1) have become no longer appropriate for the impartial and correct performance of confirmation and inspection, the Minister may order the revision of the rules of confirmation and inspection work.
（指定区分等の掲示）
(Posting of the Designation Classification)
第七十七条の二十八　指定確認検査機関は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、指定の区分、業務区域その他国土交通省令で定める事項を、その事務所において公衆に見やすいように掲示しなければならない。
Article 77-28  A designated confirmation and inspection body must post its designation classification, work area, and other items specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order at its offices so that it can be easily seen by the public, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（帳簿の備付け等）
(Bookkeeping)
第七十七条の二十九　指定確認検査機関は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、確認検査の業務に関する事項で国土交通省令で定めるものを記載した帳簿を備え付け、これを保存しなければならない。
Article 77-29  (1) A designated confirmation and inspection body must prepare and keep a book which records items concerning the confirmation and inspection work specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
２　前項に定めるもののほか、指定確認検査機関は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、確認検査の業務に関する書類で国土交通省令で定めるものを保存しなければならない。
(2) In addition to the provisions of the preceding paragraph, a designated confirmation and inspection body must maintain documents concerning its confirmation and inspection work specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（書類の閲覧）
(Perusal of Documents)
第七十七条の二十九の二　指定確認検査機関は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、確認検査の業務を行う事務所に次に掲げる書類を備え置き、第六条の二第一項の規定による確認を受けようとする者その他の関係者の求めに応じ、これを閲覧させなければならない。
Article 77-29-2  A designated confirmation and inspection body shall place the following documents at the office performing the confirmation and inspection work and must respond to a request by a person that intends to obtain confirmation under Article 6-2, paragraph (1) or other concerned person by allowing the relevant person to peruse the relevant documents.
一　当該指定確認検査機関の業務の実績を記載した書類
(i) documents listing past work of the relevant designated confirmation and inspection body;
二　確認検査員の氏名及び略歴を記載した書類
(ii) documents listing the names and personal histories of the private building inspectors;
三　確認検査の業務に関し生じた損害を賠償するために必要な金額を担保するための保険契約の締結その他の措置を講じている場合にあつては、その内容を記載した書類
(iii) in a case where an insurance contract has been entered into or other measure has been taken to bear the cost required to pay compensation for loss caused by confirmation and inspection work, documents containing detailed information regarding this matter;
四　その他指定確認検査機関の業務及び財務に関する書類で国土交通省令で定めるもの
(iv) other documents concerning the work and finances of the relevant designated confirmation and inspection body as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（監督命令）
(Ministerial Orders)
第七十七条の三十　国土交通大臣等は、確認検査の業務の公正かつ適確な実施を確保するため必要があると認めるときは、その指定に係る指定確認検査機関に対し、確認検査の業務に関し監督上必要な命令をすることができる。
Article 77-30  (1) If the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc. finds it necessary to ensure the impartial and correct performance of confirmation and inspection work, the Minister may issue to designated confirmation and inspection body pertaining to the designation an order necessary for supervision of the confirmation and inspection work.
２　国土交通大臣等は、前項の規定による命令をしたときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(2) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc. has issued an order under the preceding paragraph, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, the Minister, etc. must publicly notify to that effect.
（報告、検査等）
(Reporting, Inspections)
第七十七条の三十一　国土交通大臣等は、確認検査の業務の公正かつ適確な実施を確保するため必要があると認めるときは、その指定に係る指定確認検査機関に対し確認検査の業務に関し必要な報告を求め、又はその職員に、指定確認検査機関の事務所に立ち入り、確認検査の業務の状況若しくは帳簿、書類その他の物件を検査させ、若しくは関係者に質問させることができる。
Article 77-31  (1) If the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism finds it necessary to ensure the impartial and correct performance of the confirmation and inspection work, the Minister may request required reports for the confirmation and inspection work to the designated confirmation and inspection body pertaining to the designation, or to have its officials enter the office of the body to inspect the state of the confirmation and inspection work, or the facilities, the books, documents, and other objects, or to question related persons.
２　特定行政庁は、その指揮監督の下にある建築主事が第六条第一項の規定による確認をする権限を有する建築物の確認検査の適正な実施を確保するため必要があると認めるときは、その職員に、指定確認検査機関の事務所に立ち入り、確認検査の業務の状況若しくは帳簿、書類その他の物件を検査させ、又は関係者に質問させることができる。
(2) If the Designated Administrative Agency finds it necessary in order to ensure the proper implementation of the confirmation and inspection of buildings for which a building official under the supervision of the relevant Designated Administrative Agency has the authority to confirm under Article 6, paragraph (1), it may have its officials enter the office of the body to inspect the state of the confirmation and inspection work, or the facilities, the books, documents, and other objects, or to question related persons.
３　特定行政庁は、前項の規定による立入検査の結果、当該指定確認検査機関が、確認検査業務規程に違反する行為をし、又は確認検査の業務に関し著しく不適当な行為をした事実があると認めるときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、その旨を国土交通大臣等に報告しなければならない。
(3) If the Designated Administrative Agency finds that there is a fact that as a result of an on-site inspection under the preceding paragraph, the relevant designated confirmation and inspection body performs actions that violate the regulations for confirmation and inspection work or has performed a conspicuously improper action concerning the confirmation and inspection work, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, it must submit a report to this effect to the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc. to that effect.
４　前項の規定による報告を受けた場合において、国土交通大臣等は、必要に応じ、第七十七条の三十五第二項の規定による確認検査の業務の全部又は一部の停止命令その他の措置を講ずるものとする。
(4) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism receives a report under the preceding paragraph, the Minister, as necessary, issues an order to suspend the all or part of confirmation and inspection work under Article 77-35, paragraph (2), or takes other actions.
５　第十五条の二第二項及び第三項の規定は、第一項及び第二項の場合について準用する。
(5) The provisions of Article 15-2, paragraphs (2) and (3) shall apply mutatis mutandis in the case in paragraphs (1) and (2).
（照会及び指示）
(Inquiries and Instructions)
第七十七条の三十二　指定確認検査機関は、確認検査の適正な実施のため必要な事項について、特定行政庁に照会することができる。この場合において、当該特定行政庁は、当該照会をした者に対して、照会に係る事項の通知その他必要な措置を講ずるものとする。
Article 77-32  (1) A designated confirmation and inspection body may inquire of a Designated Administrative Agency about items necessary for the proper performance of confirmation and inspection work. In this case, the relevant Designated Administrative Agency shall provide a notice concerning the relevant inquiry to the relevant body and take other necessary measures.
２　特定行政庁は、前条第二項に規定する建築物の確認検査の適正な実施を確保するため必要があると認めるときは、指定確認検査機関に対し、当該確認検査の適正な実施のために必要な措置をとるべきことを指示することができる。
(2) If the Designated Administrative Agency finds it necessary in order to ensure the proper implementation of the confirmation and inspection of a building as specified by paragraph (2) of the preceding Article, the Designated Administrative Agency may instruct a designated confirmation and inspection body to take measures necessary for the proper performance of the relevant confirmation and inspection.
（指定確認検査機関に対する配慮）
(Assistance for Designated Confirmation and Inspection Bodies)
第七十七条の三十三　国土交通大臣及び地方公共団体は、指定確認検査機関に対して、確認検査の業務の適確な実施に必要な情報の提供その他の必要な配慮をするものとする。
Article 77-33  The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism and local governments shall provide a designated confirmation and inspection body with information and other assistance necessary for the proper performance of confirmation and inspection work.
（確認検査の業務の休廃止等）
(Suspension and Abandonment of Confirmation and Inspection Work)
第七十七条の三十四　指定確認検査機関は、確認検査の業務の全部又は一部を休止し、又は廃止しようとするときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、あらかじめ、その旨を国土交通大臣等に届け出なければならない。
Article 77-34  (1) When a designated confirmation and inspection body intends to suspend or abandon all or part of its confirmation and inspection work, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, it must notify the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc. to that effect in advance.
２　前項の規定により確認検査の業務の全部を廃止しようとする届出があつたときは、当該届出に係る指定は、その効力を失う。
(2) When a notice of abandonment of all of the confirmation and inspection work pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph is submitted, the designation concerning the relevant notice shall cease to be effective.
３　国土交通大臣等は、第一項の規定による届出があつたときは、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(3) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc. receives the notification under paragraph (1), the Minister must publicly notify.
（指定の取消し等）
(Revocation of Designation)
第七十七条の三十五　国土交通大臣等は、その指定に係る指定確認検査機関が第七十七条の十九各号（第四号を除く。）のいずれかに該当するに至つたときは、その指定を取り消さなければならない。
Article 77-35  (1) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc. must revoke the designation of a confirmation and inspection body when the relevant body comes under any one of the items in Article 77-19 (excluding item (iv)).
２　国土交通大臣等は、その指定に係る指定確認検査機関が次の各号のいずれかに該当するときは、その指定を取り消し、又は期間を定めて確認検査の業務の全部若しくは一部の停止を命ずることができる。
(2) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc. may revoke that designation or order the suspension of all or part of the confirmation and inspection work for a specified period of time, when a designated confirmation and inspection body pertaining to that designation falls under any of the following items:
一　第六条の二第四項若しくは第五項（これらの規定を第八十七条第一項、第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第一項若しくは第二項において準用する場合を含む。）、第七条の二第三項から第六項まで（これらの規定を第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第一項若しくは第二項において準用する場合を含む。）、第七条の四第二項、第三項若しくは第六項（これらの規定を第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）、第七条の六第三項（第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第一項若しくは第二項において準用する場合を含む。）、第十八条の三第三項、第七十七条の二十一第二項、第七十七条の二十二第一項若しくは第二項、第七十七条の二十四第一項から第三項まで、第七十七条の二十六、第七十七条の二十八から第七十七条の二十九の二まで又は前条第一項の規定に違反したとき。
(i) the body h Article as violated the provisions of Article 6-2, Paragraph (4) or (5) (including cases where these provisions apply mutatis mutandis to Article 87, paragraph (1); Article 87-4; or Article 88, paragraph (1) or (2); Article 7-2, paragraphs (3) through (6) (including cases where these provisions apply mutatis mutandis to 87-4, or Article 88, paragraph (1) or (2), Article 7-6, paragraph (3) (including cases where these provisions apply mutatis mutandis to Article 87-2; or Article 88, paragraph (1) or (2); Article 18-3, paragraph (3); Article 77-21, paragraph (2); Article 77-22, paragraph (1) or (2); Article 77-24, paragraphs (1) through (3); Article 77-26; Articles 77-28 through 77-29-2, or paragraph (1) of the preceding Article;
二　第七十七条の二十七第一項の認可を受けた確認検査業務規程によらないで確認検査を行つたとき。
(ii) the body has performed confirmation and inspection works not in accordance with the regulations for confirmation and inspection work approved under Article 77-27, paragraph (1);
三　第七十七条の二十四第四項、第七十七条の二十七第三項又は第七十七条の三十第一項の規定による命令に違反したとき。
(iii) the body has violated orders under Article 77-24, paragraph (4), Article 77-27, paragraph (3), or Article 77-30, paragraph (1);
四　第七十七条の二十各号に掲げる基準に適合していないと認めるとき。
(iv) it is concluded that the body does not conform to the criteria set forth in each item of Article 77-20;
五　確認検査の業務に関し著しく不適当な行為をしたとき、又はその業務に従事する確認検査員若しくは法人にあつてはその役員が、確認検査の業務に関し著しく不適当な行為をしたとき。
(v) the body, its private building inspector, or director in the case of a corporation, has acted very inappropriately in connection with the confirmation and inspection work;
六　不正な手段により指定を受けたとき。
(vi) the body was designated by illegal means.
３　国土交通大臣等は、前二項の規定により指定を取り消し、又は前項の規定により確認検査の業務の全部若しくは一部の停止を命じたときは、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(3) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc. revokes the designation pursuant to the provisions of the preceding two paragraphs, or the suspends all or part of its confirmation and inspection work pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the Minister must publicly notify to that effect.
第三節　指定構造計算適合性判定機関
Section 3 Designated Structural Calculation Conformity Review Body
（指定）
(Designation)
第七十七条の三十五の二　第十八条の二第一項の規定による指定（以下この節において単に「指定」という。）は、構造計算適合性判定の業務を行おうとする者の申請により行う。
Article 77-35-2  (1) A designation under Article 18-2, paragraph (1) (hereinafter in this Section referred to simply as "designation") shall be given based on an application by a person who intends to perform structural calculation conformity review work.
２　前項の申請は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、構造計算適合性判定の業務を行う区域（以下この節において「業務区域」という。）を定めてしなければならない。
(2) An application as referred to in the preceding paragraph must indicate the area in which structural calculation conformity review work will be carried out (hereinafter referred to in this section as the "work area") under Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order
３　国土交通大臣は、指定をしようとするときは、あらかじめ、業務区域を所轄する都道府県知事の意見を聴かなければならない。
(3) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism must seek the opinion of the prefectural governor with jurisdiction over the work area before making a designation.
（欠格条項）
(Disqualification)
第七十七条の三十五の三　次の各号のいずれかに該当する者は、指定を受けることができない。
Article 77-35-3  A person coming under any of the following items shall not be able to obtain designation.
一　未成年者
(i) a minor;
二　破産手続開始の決定を受けて復権を得ない者
(ii) a person that has been ordered to begin bankruptcy procedures and is unable to be reinstated;
三　禁錮以上の刑に処せられ、又は建築基準法令の規定により刑に処せられ、その執行を終わり、又は執行を受けることがなくなつた日から起算して五年を経過しない者
(iii) a person who has been sentenced to imprisonment or a higher penalty, or sentenced to punishment pursuant to the provisions of standard laws and regulations, and for whom five years have not yet elapsed since the date on which relevant execution has been completed or has become no longer subject to execution;
四　第七十七条の三十五第二項の規定により第七十七条の十八第一項に規定する指定を取り消され、その取消しの日から起算して五年を経過しない者
(iv) a person whose designation under Article 77-18, paragraph (1) has been revoked pursuant to the provisions of Article 77-35, paragraph (2), and for whom five years have not yet elapsed since the date of the relevant revocation;
五　第七十七条の三十五の十九第一項又は第二項の規定により指定を取り消され、その取消しの日から起算して五年を経過しない者
(v) a person whose designation has been revoked pursuant to the provisions of Article 77-35-19, paragraph (1) or (2), and for whom five years have not yet elapsed since the date of the relevant revocation;
六　第七十七条の六十二第二項（第七十七条の六十六第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定により第七十七条の五十八第一項又は第七十七条の六十六第一項の登録を消除され、その消除の日から起算して五年を経過しない者
(vi) a person whose registration under Article 77-58, paragraph (1) or Article 77-66, paragraph (1) has been deleted pursuant to the provisions of Article 77-62, paragraph (2) (including the cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis under Article 77-66, Paragraph (2)) and for whom five years have not yet elapsed since the date of the relevant deletion.
七　建築士法第七条第四号又は第二十三条の四第一項第三号に該当する者
(vii) a person coming under Article 7, item (iv) or Article 23-4, paragraph (1), item (iii) of the Act on Architects and Building Engineers;
八　公務員で懲戒免職の処分を受け、その処分の日から起算して三年を経過しない者
(viii) a government employee that has been subject to a disposition of disciplinary dismissal, and for whom three years have not yet elapsed since the date of the relevant disposition;
九　心身の故障により構造計算適合性判定の業務を適正に行うことができない者として国土交通省令で定めるもの
(ix) a person who has been specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order as a person who is incapable of performing the structural calculation conformity review work appropriately due to mental or physical incapacitation;
十　法人であつて、その役員のうちに前各号のいずれかに該当する者があるもの
(x) a corporation of which executives include a person that comes under any of the preceding items;
十一　その者の親会社等が前各号のいずれかに該当する者
(xi) a person whose parent company, etc. comes under any of the preceding items.
（指定の基準）
(Designation Criteria)
第七十七条の三十五の四　国土交通大臣又は都道府県知事は、指定の申請が次に掲げる基準に適合していると認めるときでなければ、指定をしてはならない。
Article 77-35-4  The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or the prefectural governor shall not give a designation if it cannot be confirmed that the applicant for designation satisfies the following criteria:
一　第七十七条の三十五の九第一項の構造計算適合性判定員（職員である者に限る。）の数が、構造計算適合性判定を行おうとする建築物の規模及び数に応じて国土交通省令で定める数以上であること。
(i) the number of structural calculation conformity reviewers (limited to staff) Article 77-35-9, paragraph (1) must be equal to or greater than the number specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order according to the size and number of buildings;
二　前号に定めるもののほか、職員、設備、構造計算適合性判定の業務の実施の方法その他の事項についての構造計算適合性判定の業務の実施に関する計画が、構造計算適合性判定の業務の適確な実施のために適切なものであること。
(ii) in addition to the provisions of the preceding item, a plan for the implementation of structural calculation conformity review work concerning staff, equipment, method of the implementation, and other matters hall be appropriate for the proper performance of the relevant work;
三　その者の有する財産の評価額（その者が法人である場合にあつては、資本金、基本金その他これらに準ずるものの額）が国土交通省令で定める額以上であること。
(iii) the assessed value of the of the applicant's assets (if the applicant is a corporation, the capital, endowment, or other assets thereof) must be equal to or greater than the amount specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order;
四　前号に定めるもののほか、第二号の構造計算適合性判定の業務の実施に関する計画を適確に実施するに足りる経理的基礎を有するものであること；
(iv) in addition to the provisions of the preceding item, the applicant shall have accounting foundations sufficient to properly execute the plan for the performance of the structural calculation conformity review work in item (ii);
五　法人にあつては役員、第七十七条の二十第五号の国土交通省令で定める構成員又は職員（第七十七条の三十五の九第一項の構造計算適合性判定員を含む。以下この号において同じ。）の構成が、法人以外の者にあつてはその者及びその職員の構成が、構造計算適合性判定の業務の公正な実施に支障を及ぼすおそれがないものであること。
(v) in the case of an applicant that is a corporation, there shall be no possibility that its executives, its members and the composition of its employees (including the number of structural calculation conformity reviewers in Article 77-35-9, paragraph (1), the same in the following items) specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order under Article 77-20, item (v), and in the case of an applicant other than a corporation, the applicant and the composition of its employees, will obstruct the impartial performance of the structural calculation conformity review work;
六　その者又はその者の親会社等が指定確認検査機関である場合には、当該指定確認検査機関に対してされた第六条の二第一項の規定による確認の申請に係る建築物の計画について、第十八条の二第四項の規定により読み替えて適用される第六条の三第一項の規定による構造計算適合性判定を行わないものであること。
(vi) in a case where the applicant or the applicant's parent company, etc. is a designated confirmation and inspection body, the relevant body shall not perform structural calculation conformity review relating to plan for the buildings covered by applications to the relevant designated confirmation and inspection body under Article 6-2, paragraph (1), to which the provisions of Article 6-3, paragraph (1) are applied alternatively pursuant to the provisions of Article 18-2, paragraph (4);
七　前号に定めるもののほか、その者又はその者の親会社等が構造計算適合性判定の業務以外の業務を行つている場合には、その業務を行うことによつて構造計算適合性判定の業務の公正な実施に支障を及ぼすおそれがないものであること。
(vii) in addition to the provisions of the preceding item, in a case where the applicant or the applicant's parent company, etc. perform work other than structural calculation conformity review, there shall be no possibility of the performance of this work obstructing the impartial performance of the structural calculation conformity review work;
八　前各号に定めるもののほか、構造計算適合性判定の業務を行うにつき十分な適格性を有するものであること。
(viii) in addition to the stipulations of the preceding items, the applicant shall be fully suitable for performing structural calculation conformity review work.
（指定の公示等）
(Public Notice of Designations)
第七十七条の三十五の五　国土交通大臣又は都道府県知事は、指定をしたときは、指定を受けた者（以下この節及び第百条において「指定構造計算適合性判定機関」という。）の名称及び住所並びに業務区域を公示しなければならない。
Article 77-35-5  (1) When the Minister of Land Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or the prefectural governor has made a designation, the prefectural governor must publicly notify of the name and address of the applicant that has received the designation (hereinafter in this Section and in Article 100 referred to as "designated structural calculation conformity review body"), and the address of the office where the designated structural calculation conformity review body performs the structural calculation conformity review work, and the date that the designated structural calculation conformity review body begins to perform the structural calculation conformity review work.
２　指定構造計算適合性判定機関は、その名称又は住所を変更しようとするときは、変更しようとする日の二週間前までに、その指定をした国土交通大臣又は都道府県知事（以下この節において「国土交通大臣等」という。）にその旨を届け出なければならない。
(2) When the designated structural calculation conformity review body intends to change its name or address, or the address of the office where it performs the structural calculation conformity review work, the designated structural calculation conformity review body must notify the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism or the prefectural governor (referred to in the remainder of this section as "the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc.") who made the designation to that effect at least two weeks prior to the day of the relevant change.
３　国土交通大臣等は、前項の規定による届出があつたときは、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(3) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc., receives the notification under the preceding paragraph, the Minister must publicly notify to that effect.
（業務区域の変更）
(Change of Work Area)
第七十七条の三十五の六　指定構造計算適合性判定機関は、業務区域を増加し、又は減少しようとするときは、国土交通大臣等の認可を受けなければならない。
Article 77-35-6  (1) If the designated structural calculation conformity review body wishes to increase or reduce its work area, it must obtain the approval of the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc.
２　国土交通大臣は、指定構造計算適合性判定機関が業務区域を減少しようとするときは、当該業務区域の減少により構造計算適合性判定の業務の適正かつ確実な実施が損なわれるおそれがないと認めるときでなければ、前項の認可をしてはならない。
(2) If the designated structural calculation conformity review body wishes to reduce its work area, the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism must not give approval if there is a risk that the relevant work area reduction may jeopardize the appropriate and reliable implementation of structural calculation conformity review work.
３　第七十七条の三十五の二第三項及び第七十七条の三十五の四第一号から第四号までの規定は、第一項の認可について準用する。この場合において、第七十七条の三十五の二第三項中「業務区域」とあるのは、「増加し、又は減少しようとする業務区域」と読み替えるものとする。
(3) The provisions of Articles 77-35-2, paragraph (3) and Article 77-35-4, items (i) through (iv) shall apply mutatis mutandis to approvals under the provisions of paragraph (1). In this case, "the work area" in Article 77-35-2, paragraph (3) shall be read as "the work area to be increased or decreased".
４　国土交通大臣等は、第一項の認可をしたときは、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(4) If the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism give any approval of paragraph (1), the Minister must publicly notify to that effect.
（指定の更新）
(Renewal of Designation)
第七十七条の三十五の七　指定は、五年以上十年以内において政令で定める期間ごとにその更新を受けなければ、その期間の経過によつて、その効力を失う。
Article 77-35-7  (1) A designation shall, if it is not renewed at the end of a period between five years and ten years specified by Cabinet Order, become invalid after the relevant period has elapsed.
２　第七十七条の三十五の二から第七十七条の三十五の四までの規定は、前項の指定の更新の場合について準用する。
(2) The provisions of Articles 77-35-2 through 35-4 shall apply mutatis mutandis in the case of the renewal of designation under the preceding paragraph.
（委任の公示等）
(Public Notice of Assignment of Authority)
第七十七条の三十五の八　第十八条の二第一項の規定により指定構造計算適合性判定機関にその構造計算適合性判定を行わせることとした都道府県知事（以下「委任都道府県知事」という。）は、当該指定構造計算適合性判定機関の名称及び住所、業務区域並びに当該構造計算適合性判定の業務を行う事務所の所在地並びに当該指定構造計算適合性判定機関に行わせることとした構造計算適合性判定の業務及び当該構造計算適合性判定の業務の開始の日を公示しなければならない。
Article 77-35-8  (1) A prefectural governor that decides to enable a designated structural calculation conformity review body to perform structural calculation conformity review work pursuant to the provisions of Article 18-2, paragraph (1) (hereinafter referred to as "the delegating prefectural governor") must publicly notify of the name and address of the designated structural calculation conformity review body, the work area, and address of the office where the structural calculation conformity review work will be performed, the type of structural calculation conformity review work that the designated structural calculation conformity review body will be allowed to perform, and the date on which the relevant structural calculation conformity review work will commence.
２　国土交通大臣の指定に係る指定構造計算適合性判定機関は、その名称又は住所を変更しようとするときは委任都道府県知事に、構造計算適合性判定の業務を行う事務所の所在地を変更しようとするときは関係委任都道府県知事に、それぞれ、変更しようとする日の二週間前までに、その旨を届け出なければならない。
(2) A designated structural calculation conformity review body pertaining to a designation by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism must notify the delegating prefectural governor, when intending to change its name or address, and notify the delegating prefectural governor, when intending to change the address of the office where it performs designated structural calculation conformity review work, to that effect at least two weeks prior to the day of the relevant change.
３　都道府県知事の指定に係る指定構造計算適合性判定機関は、構造計算適合性判定の業務を行う事務所の所在地を変更しようとするときは、変更しようとする日の二週間前までに、その旨を委任都道府県知事に届け出なければならない。
(3) When a designated structural calculation conformity review body pertaining to a designation by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism intends to change the address of the office where it performs designated structural calculation conformity review work, it must notify the delegating prefectural governor to that effect at least two weeks prior to the day of the relevant change.
４　委任都道府県知事は、前二項の規定による届出があつたときは、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(4) When the delegating prefectural governor receives a notification under the preceding two paragraphs, the governor must publicly notify to that effect.
（構造計算適合性判定員）
(Structural Calculation conformity Reviewer)
第七十七条の三十五の九　指定構造計算適合性判定機関は、構造計算適合性判定を行うときは、構造計算適合性判定員に構造計算適合性判定を実施させなければならない。
Article 77-35-9  (1) When a designated structural calculation conformity review body performs structural calculation conformity reviews, the designated structural calculation conformity review body must have structural calculation conformity review perform the structural calculation.
２　構造計算適合性判定員は、第七十七条の六十六第一項の登録を受けた者のうちから選任しなければならない。
(2) Structural calculation conformity reviewers must be appointed from among people who are registered under the provisions of Article 77-66, paragraph (1).
３　指定構造計算適合性判定機関は、構造計算適合性判定員を選任し、又は解任したときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、その旨を国土交通大臣等に届け出なければならない。
(3) When a designated structural calculation conformity review body appoints or dismisses a structural calculation conformity reviewer, the designated structural calculation conformity review body must notify the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc., to that effect, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
４　国土交通大臣等は、構造計算適合性判定員の在任により指定構造計算適合性判定機関が第七十七条の三十五の四第五号に掲げる基準に適合しなくなつたときは、指定構造計算適合性判定機関に対し、その構造計算適合性判定員を解任すべきことを命ずることができる。
(4) When a serving structural calculation conformity reviewer has contravened the structural calculation conformity review work regulations approved under Article 77-35-9, paragraph (1), has performed a conspicuously improper action related to the structural calculation conformity review work, or when the designated structural calculation conformity review body no longer satisfies the criteria set forth in Article 77-35-4, item (v) as a result of the continued appointment of the structural calculation conformity reviewer, the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc., may issue an order to the designated structural calculation conformity review body to dismiss relevant structural calculation conformity reviewer.
（秘密保持義務等）
(Obligation to Maintain Confidentiality)
第七十七条の三十五の十　指定構造計算適合性判定機関（その者が法人である場合にあつては、その役員。次項において同じ。）及びその職員（構造計算適合性判定員を含む。次項において同じ。）並びにこれらの者であつた者は、構造計算適合性判定の業務に関して知り得た秘密を漏らし、又は盗用してはならない。
Article 77-35-10  (1) A designated structural calculation conformity review body (when this body is a corporation, its executives; the same in the following paragraph) and its employees (including structural calculation conformity reviewers; the same in the following paragraph), and people who are these parties shall not reveal any confidential information it has obtained concerning the structural calculation conformity review work, nor appropriate this confidential information.
２　指定構造計算適合性判定機関及びその職員で構造計算適合性判定の業務に従事するものは、刑法その他の罰則の適用については、法令により公務に従事する職員とみなす。
(2) A designated structural calculation conformity review body and its employees that perform structural calculation conformity review work shall be considered to be employees that perform official public work concerning the application of the Penal Code and other penalties as specified by laws.
（構造計算適合性判定の義務）
(Obligation to Perform Structural Calculation Conformity Reviews)
第七十七条の三十五の十一　指定構造計算適合性判定機関は、構造計算適合性判定を行うべきことを求められたときは、正当な理由がある場合を除き、遅滞なく、構造計算適合性判定を行わなければならない。
Article 77-35-11  If a designated structural calculation conformity review body is asked to perform a structural calculation conformity review, it must perform the relevant structural calculation conformity review without delay unless there are justifiable grounds that prevent it from doing so.
（構造計算適合性判定業務規程）
(Regulations for Structural Calculation Conformity Review Work)
第七十七条の三十五の十二　指定構造計算適合性判定機関は、構造計算適合性判定の業務に関する規程（以下この節において「構造計算適合性判定業務規程」という。）を定め、国土交通大臣等の認可を受けなければならない。これを変更しようとするときも、同様とする。
Article 77-35-12  (1) A designated structural calculation conformity review body shall enact and must obtain the approval of the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc., for regulations concerning the structural calculation conformity review work (hereinafter in this section, referred to as, "regulations for structural calculation conformity review work"). When this is revised, the same shall apply.
２　構造計算適合性判定業務規程で定めるべき事項は、国土交通省令で定める。
(2) Items that must be specified by the regulations for structural calculation conformity review work shall be specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
３　国土交通大臣等は、第一項の認可をした構造計算適合性判定業務規程が構造計算適合性判定の公正かつ適確な実施上不適当となつたと認めるときは、その構造計算適合性判定業務規程を変更すべきことを命ずることができる。
(3) If the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc. finds that the rules of structural calculation conformity review work approved under paragraph (1) have become no longer appropriate for the impartial and correct performance of structural calculation conformity review, the Minister may order the revision of the rules of structural calculation conformity review work.
（業務区域等の掲示）
(Posting of Work Area)
第七十七条の三十五の十三　指定構造計算適合性判定機関は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、業務区域その他国土交通省令で定める事項を、その事務所において公衆に見やすいように掲示しなければならない。
Article 77-35-13  The designated structural calculation conformity review body must post its work area and other information as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order in its office in a position that is readily accessible to the public, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（帳簿の備付け等）
(Bookkeeping)
第七十七条の三十五の十四　指定構造計算適合性判定機関は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、構造計算適合性判定の業務に関する事項で国土交通省令で定めるものを記載した帳簿を備え付け、これを保存しなければならない。
Article 77-35-14  (1) A designated structural calculation conformity review body must prepare and keep a book which records items concerning the structural calculation conformity review work specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
２　前項に定めるもののほか、指定構造計算適合性判定機関は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、構造計算適合性判定の業務に関する書類で国土交通省令で定めるものを保存しなければならない。
(2) In addition to the provisions of the preceding paragraph, a designated structural calculation conformity review body must retain documents concerning the structural calculation conformity review work that are specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（書類の閲覧）
(Provision of Documents for Perusal)
第七十七条の三十五の十五　指定構造計算適合性判定機関は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、構造計算適合性判定の業務を行う事務所に次に掲げる書類を備え置き、構造計算適合性判定を受けようとする者その他の関係者の求めに応じ、これを閲覧させなければならない。
Article 77-35-15  A designated structural calculation conformity review body must place the following documents, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, in the office where designated structural calculation conformity review work is performed and make those documents available by perusal by those seeking designated structural calculation conformity reviews and other concerned parties.
一　当該指定構造計算適合性判定機関の業務の実績を記載した書類
(i) documents recording work performed by the relevant designated structural calculation conformity review body;
二　構造計算適合性判定員の氏名及び略歴を記載した書類
(ii) documents listing the names and brief personal histories of designated structural calculation conformity reviewer;
三　構造計算適合性判定の業務に関し生じた損害を賠償するために必要な金額を担保するための保険契約の締結その他の措置を講じている場合にあつては、その内容を記載した書類
(iii) documents detailing the conclusion of insurance agreements and other measures, if any, to guarantee the funds required to provide compensation for losses suffered in relation to designated structural calculation conformity review work;
四　その他指定構造計算適合性判定機関の業務及び財務に関する書類で国土交通省令で定めるもの
(iv) other documents pertaining to the work and financial position of the designated structural calculation conformity review body, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（監督命令）
(Ministerial Orders)
第七十七条の三十五の十六　国土交通大臣等は、構造計算適合性判定の業務の公正かつ適確な実施を確保するため必要があると認めるときは、その指定に係る指定構造計算適合性判定機関に対し、構造計算適合性判定の業務に関し監督上必要な命令をすることができる。
Article 77-35-16  (1) If the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc. finds it necessary to ensure the impartial and correct performance of structural calculation conformity review work, the Minister may issue to designated structural calculation conformity review body pertaining to the designation an order necessary for supervision of the structural calculation conformity review work.
２　国土交通大臣等は、前項の規定による命令をしたときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(2) Having issued an order under the preceding paragraph, the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc., must publicly notify to that effect as specified Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（報告、検査等）
(Reporting, Inspections)
第七十七条の三十五の十七　国土交通大臣等又は委任都道府県知事は、構造計算適合性判定の業務の公正かつ適確な実施を確保するため必要があると認めるときは、国土交通大臣等にあつてはその指定に係る指定構造計算適合性判定機関に対し、委任都道府県知事にあつてはその構造計算適合性判定を行わせることとした指定構造計算適合性判定機関に対し、構造計算適合性判定の業務に関し必要な報告を求め、又はその職員に、指定構造計算適合性判定機関の事務所に立ち入り、構造計算適合性判定の業務の状況若しくは設備、帳簿、書類その他の物件を検査させ、若しくは関係者に質問させることができる。
Article 77-35-17  (1) If the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc. or the delegating prefectural governor finds it necessary to ensure the impartial and correct performance of the structural calculation conformity review work, the Minister, etc. or the governor may request required reports for the Structural calculation conformity review work to the designated structural calculation conformity review body pertaining to the designation in case of the Minister, etc. and to the designated structural calculation conformity review body that has been assigned to perform the structural calculation conformity review in case of the governor, or to have its officials enter the office of the body to inspect the state of the structural calculation conformity review work, or the facilities, the books, documents, and other objects, or to question related persons. When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc., or the delegating prefectural governor deems it necessary to do so in order to ensure the impartial and proper performance of structural calculation conformity review work, the required reports concerning structural calculation conformity review work may be sought from the designated structural calculation conformity review body covered by the designation in the case of Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc., or from the designated structural calculation conformity review body that was allowed to perform structural calculation conformity review work in the case of the delegating prefectural governor, or staff may be directed to enter the offices of the designated structural calculation conformity review body to examine the state of structural calculation conformity review work, equipment, ledgers, documents, and other objects, or to question related persons.
２　委任都道府県知事は、前項の規定による立入検査の結果、当該指定構造計算適合性判定機関（国土交通大臣の指定に係る者に限る。）が、構造計算適合性判定業務規程に違反する行為をし、又は構造計算適合性判定の業務に関し著しく不適当な行為をした事実があると認めるときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、その旨を国土交通大臣に報告しなければならない。
(2) If the delegating prefectural governor finds that there is a fact that as a result of an on-site inspection under the preceding paragraph, the relevant structural calculation conformity review body (limited to those designated by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism) performs actions that violate the regulations for structural calculation conformity review work or has performed a conspicuously improper action concerning the structural calculation conformity review work, the Designated Administrative Agency must submit a report to this effect to the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc. as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
３　前項の規定による報告を受けた場合において、国土交通大臣は、必要に応じ、第七十七条の三十五の十九第二項の規定による構造計算適合性判定の業務の全部又は一部の停止命令その他の措置を講ずるものとする。
(3) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism receives a report under the preceding paragraph, the Minister, as necessary, issues an order to suspend the all or part of structural calculation conformity review work under the provisions of Article 77-35-19, paragraph (2), or takes other actions.
４　第十五条の二第二項及び第三項の規定は、第一項の場合について準用する。
(4) The provisions of Article 15-2, paragraphs (2) and (3) shall apply mutatis mutandis in the circumstances defined in paragraph (1).
（構造計算適合性判定の業務の休廃止等）
(Suspension and Abandonment of Structural Calculation Conformity Review Work)
第七十七条の三十五の十八　指定構造計算適合性判定機関は、国土交通大臣等の許可を受けなければ、構造計算適合性判定の業務の全部又は一部を休止し、又は廃止してはならない。
Article 77-35-18  (1) When a designated structural calculation conformity review body does not obtain approval of the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc., the designated structural calculation conformity review body shall not suspend or abandon all or part of the structural calculation conformity review work.
２　国土交通大臣は、指定構造計算適合性判定機関の構造計算適合性判定の業務の全部又は一部の休止又は廃止により構造計算適合性判定の業務の適正かつ確実な実施が損なわれるおそれがないと認めるときでなければ、前項の許可をしてはならない。
(2) If the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism deems that there is no risk that the suspension of all or part of the structural calculation conformity review work by the designated structural calculation conformity review body may hinder the appropriate and reliable implementation of structural calculation conformity review work, approval as defined in the preceding paragraph must not be given.
３　国土交通大臣は、第一項の許可をしようとするときは、関係委任都道府県知事の意見を聴かなければならない。
(3) When providing approval as defined in paragraph (1), the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism must seek the opinions of the delegating prefectural governor concerned.
４　国土交通大臣等が第一項の規定により構造計算適合性判定の業務の全部の廃止を許可したときは、当該許可に係る指定は、その効力を失う。
(4) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc., has approved the abandonment of all or part of the structural calculation conformity review work pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (1), the designation under the relevant approval must cease to be effective.
５　国土交通大臣等は、第一項の許可をしたときは、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(5) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism has given permission under paragraph (1), the Minister must publicly notify to that effect.
（指定の取消し等）
(Revocation of Designation)
第七十七条の三十五の十九　国土交通大臣等は、その指定に係る指定構造計算適合性判定機関が第七十七条の三十五の三各号（第五号を除く。）のいずれかに該当するに至つたときは、その指定を取り消さなければならない。
Article 77-35-19  (1) When a designated structural calculation conformity review body comes under any one of the items in Article 77-35-3 (excluding item (v)), the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism must revoke its designation.
２　国土交通大臣等は、その指定に係る指定構造計算適合性判定機関が次の各号のいずれかに該当するときは、その指定を取り消し、又は期間を定めて構造計算適合性判定の業務の全部若しくは一部の停止を命ずることができる。
(2) When a designated structural calculation conformity review body covered by a designation comes under any of the following items, the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc. may revoke its designation or set a time period and order that all or part of the structural calculation conformity review work be stopped.
一　第十八条の二第四項の規定により読み替えて適用される第六条の三第四項から第六項まで若しくは第十八条第七項から第九項までの規定又は第十八条の三第三項、第七十七条の三十五の五第二項、第七十七条の三十五の六第一項、第七十七条の三十五の八第二項若しくは第三項、第七十七条の三十五の九第一項から第三項まで、第七十七条の三十五の十一、第七十七条の三十五の十三から第七十七条の三十五の十五まで若しくは前条第一項の規定に違反したとき。
(i) it has violated the provisions of Article 6-3, paragraphs (4) through (6), which is applied alternatively pursuant to the provisions of Article 18-2, paragraph (4); or the provisions of Article 18, paragraphs (7) through (9); or Article 18-3, paragraph (3); Article 77-35-5, paragraph (2); Article 77-35-6, paragraph (1); Article 77-35-8, paragraph (2) or (3); Article 77-35-9, paragraphs (1) through (3); Article 77-35-11; Articles 77-35-13 through 77-35-15, or paragraph (1) of the preceding Article;
二　第七十七条の三十五の十二第一項の認可を受けた構造計算適合性判定業務規程によらないで構造計算適合性判定を行つたとき。
(ii) it has performed a structural calculation conformity review without complying with the regulations for structural calculation conformity review work approved under Article 77-35-12, paragraph (1);
三　第七十七条の三十五の九第四項、第七十七条の三十五の十二第三項又は第七十七条の三十五の十六第一項の規定による命令に違反したとき。
(iii) it has disobeyed an order under Article 77-35-9, paragraph (4), Article 77-35-12, paragraph (3) or Article 77-35-16.
四　第七十七条の三十五の四各号に掲げる基準に適合していないと認めるとき。
(iv) It has been confirmed that it does not conform to the criteria set forth in the items of Article 77-35-4;
五　構造計算適合性判定の業務に関し著しく不適当な行為をしたとき、又はその業務に従事する構造計算適合性判定員若しくは法人にあつてはその役員が、構造計算適合性判定の業務に関し著しく不適当な行為をしたとき。
(v) it has performed a remarkably improper action concerning the structural calculation conformity review work, or a structural calculation conformity reviewer or its executive that performs the relevant work in the case of a corporation has performed a remarkably improper action concerning the structural calculation conformity review work;
六　不正な手段により指定を受けたとき。
(vi) a designation has been obtained by an improper method.
３　国土交通大臣等は、前二項の規定により指定を取り消し、又は前項の規定により構造計算適合性判定の業務の全部若しくは一部の停止を命じたときは、その旨を公示するとともに、国土交通大臣にあつては関係都道府県知事に通知しなければならない。
(3) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc., has revoked a designation pursuant to the provisions of the preceding two paragraphs or when the prefectural governor has ordered that all or part of the structural calculation conformity review work be stopped pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism must publicly notify to that effect and notify the prefectural governor concerned.
（構造計算適合性判定の委任の解除）
(Revocation of Assignment of Authority to Perform Structural Calculation Conformity Reviews)
第七十七条の三十五の二十　委任都道府県知事は、指定構造計算適合性判定機関に構造計算適合性判定の全部又は一部を行わせないこととするときは、その六月前までに、その旨を指定構造計算適合性判定機関に通知しなければならない。
Article 77-35-20  (1) If the delegating prefectural governor intends no longer to allow the designated structural calculation conformity review body to perform all or part of the structural calculation conformity review work, the delegating prefectural governor must notify the designated structural calculation conformity review body to that effect no later than six months in advance.
２　委任都道府県知事は、指定構造計算適合性判定機関に構造計算適合性判定の全部又は一部を行わせないこととしたときは、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(2) When a delegating prefectural governor intends no longer to allow the designated structural calculation conformity review body to perform all or part of the structural calculation conformity review work, the governor must publicly notify to that effect.
（委任都道府県知事による構造計算適合性判定の実施）
(Performance of Structural Calculation Conformity Review by a Delegating Prefectural Governor)
第七十七条の三十五の二十一　委任都道府県知事は、指定構造計算適合性判定機関が次の各号のいずれかに該当するときは、第十八条の二第三項の規定にかかわらず、当該指定構造計算適合性判定機関が休止し、停止を命じられ、又は実施することが困難となつた構造計算適合性判定の業務のうち他の指定構造計算適合性判定機関によつて行われないものを自ら行うものとする。
Article 77-35-21  (1) When a designated structural calculation conformity review body comes under any of the following items, the delegating prefectural governor shall, notwithstanding the provisions of Article 18-2, paragraph (3), perform the structural calculation conformity review work that became difficult to perform by the relevant designated structural calculation conformity review body be suspended or abolished, and that is also difficult for another designated structural calculation conformity review body to perform.
一　第七十七条の三十五の十八第一項の規定により構造計算適合性判定の業務の全部又は一部を休止したとき。
(i) when all or part of the structural calculation conformity review work has been suspended pursuant to the provisions of Article 77-35-18, paragraph (1);
二　第七十七条の三十五の十九第二項の規定により構造計算適合性判定の業務の全部又は一部の停止を命じられたとき。
(ii) when an order to stop all or part of structural calculation conformity review work has been issued pursuant to the provisions of Article 77-35-19, paragraph (2) and paragraph (2) of the preceding Article;
三　天災その他の事由により構造計算適合性判定の業務の全部又は一部を実施することが困難となつた場合において委任都道府県知事が必要があると認めるとき。
(iii) when the delegating prefectural governor deems it necessary to do so in a case where it is difficult to perform all or part of the structural calculation conformity review work because of a natural disaster or other reason.
２　委任都道府県知事は、前項の規定により構造計算適合性判定の業務を行い、又は同項の規定により行つている構造計算適合性判定の業務を行わないこととしようとするときは、あらかじめ、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(2) When the delegating prefectural governor performs structural calculation conformity review work pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph or does not intend to perform the structural calculation conformity review work performed pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the governor must publicly notify to that effect in advance.
３　委任都道府県知事が第一項の規定により構造計算適合性判定の業務を行うこととし、又は国土交通大臣等が第七十七条の三十五の六第一項の規定により業務区域の減少を認可し、第七十七条の三十五の十八第一項の規定により構造計算適合性判定の業務の廃止を許可し、若しくは第七十七条の三十五の十九第一項若しくは第二項の規定により指定を取り消した場合における構造計算適合性判定の業務の引継ぎその他の必要な事項は、国土交通省令で定める。
(3) If the delegating prefectural governor, intending to perform structural calculation conformity review work pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (1), authorizes the cessation of structural calculation conformity review work under the provisions of Article 77-35-18, paragraph (1), or revokes the designation pursuant to the provisions of Article 77-35-19, paragraph (1) or 2, or if the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism has given approval for the reduction of the work area pursuant to the provisions of Article 77-35-6, paragraph (1), the succession to structural calculation conformity review work and other necessary items shall be as specified by a Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
第四節　指定認定機関等
Section 4 Designated Approval Body
（指定）
(Designation)
第七十七条の三十六　第六十八条の二十四第一項（第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による指定（以下この節において単に「指定」という。）は、認定等を行おうとする者（外国にある事務所により行おうとする者を除く。）の申請により行う。
Article 77-36  (1) The designation under Article 68-24, paragraph (1) (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 88, paragraph (1)) (hereinafter in this Section referred to simply as "designation") shall be performed in response to an application by those wishing to perform approval, etc. (excluding the person performing the work at an overseas office).
２　前項の申請は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、国土交通省令で定める区分に従い、認定等の業務を行う区域（以下この節において「業務区域」という。）を定めてしなければならない。
(2) The application in the preceding paragraph must stipulate the area where the approval, etc. will be performed in accordance with classification specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order (hereinafter in this Section referred to as "work area"), as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（欠格条項）
(Disqualification)
第七十七条の三十七　次の各号のいずれかに該当する者は、指定を受けることができない。
Article 77-37  A person coming under any of the following items is not qualified for designation:
一　未成年者
(i) a Minor;
二　破産手続開始の決定を受けて復権を得ない者
(ii) a person that has been ordered to begin bankruptcy procedures and is unable to be reinstated;
三　禁錮以上の刑に処せられ、又は建築基準法令の規定により刑に処せられ、その執行を終わり、又は執行を受けることがなくなつた日から起算して二年を経過しない者
(iii) a person who has been sentenced to imprisonment or a higher penalty, or sentenced to punishment pursuant to the provisions of building standard laws and regulations, and for whom two years have not yet elapsed since the date on which relevant execution has been completed or has become no longer subject to execution;
四　第七十七条の五十一第一項若しくは第二項の規定により指定を取り消され、又は第七十七条の五十五第一項若しくは第二項の規定により承認を取り消され、その取消しの日から起算して二年を経過しない者
(iv) a person whose designation has been revoked pursuant to the provisions of Article 77-51, paragraph (1) or (2), or whose recognition was revoked pursuant to the provisions of Article 77-55, paragraph (1) or (2), and for whom two years have not yet elapsed since the date of the relevant revocation;
五　心身の故障により認定等の業務を適正に行うことができない者として国土交通省令で定めるもの
(v) a person who has been specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order as a person who is incapable of performing the approval, etc. work appropriately due to mental or physical incapacitation;
六　法人であつて、その役員のうちに前各号のいずれかに該当する者があるもの
(vi) a corporation of which executives include a person that comes under any of the preceding items.
（指定の基準）
(Designation Criteria)
第七十七条の三十八　国土交通大臣は、指定の申請が次に掲げる基準に適合していると認めるときでなければ、指定をしてはならない。
Article 77-38  The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism shall not designate an approval body unless it is concluded that an application for the designation conforms to the following criteria:
一　職員（第七十七条の四十二第一項の認定員を含む。第三号において同じ。）、設備、認定等の業務の実施の方法その他の事項についての認定等の業務の実施に関する計画が、認定等の業務の適確な実施のために適切なものであること。
(i) a plan for the implementation of approval, etc. work concerning staff (including approvers in Article 77-42, paragraph (1); the same in item (3)), facilities, methods of the implementation and other matters shall be appropriate for the proper performance of the relevant work;
二　前号の認定等の業務の実施に関する計画を適確に実施するに足りる経理的及び技術的な基礎を有するものであること。
(ii) the applicant shall have sufficient funds and technical capabilities for the proper execution of the plans for the approval work, etc.;
三　法人にあつては役員、第七十七条の二十第五号の国土交通省令で定める構成員又は職員の構成が、法人以外の者にあつてはその者及びその職員の構成が、認定等の業務の公正な実施に支障を及ぼすおそれがないものであること。
(iii) the composition of the members of the applicant, in the case of a corporation, the directors, members or staff specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order under Article 77-20, item (v); in the case of a person other than a corporation, the applicant itself and staff shall not compromise the neutrality and independence of the approval work, etc.;
四　認定等の業務以外の業務を行つている場合には、その業務を行うことによつて認定等の業務の公正な実施に支障を及ぼすおそれがないものであること。
(iv) if the applicant performs work other than approval work, etc. the neutrality and independence of the relevant approval work shall not be compromised;
五　前各号に定めるもののほか、認定等の業務を行うにつき十分な適格性を有するものであること。
(v) in addition to the provisions of the preceding items, the applicant shall be sufficiently qualified to perform the approval work, etc.
（指定の公示等）
(Public Notice of Designations)
第七十七条の三十九　国土交通大臣は、指定をしたときは、指定を受けた者（以下この節、第九十七条の四及び第百条において「指定認定機関」という。）の名称及び住所、指定の区分、業務区域、認定等の業務を行う事務所の所在地並びに認定等の業務の開始の日を公示しなければならない。
Article 77-39  (1) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism has designated an approval body, the Minister must publicly notify of the name and address of the designated person (hereinafter referred to in this Section, Article 97-4 and Article 100 as "designated approval body"), the classification of the designation, work area, and the address of the office performing the approval work, etc. and the day the approval work, etc. starts.
２　指定認定機関は、その名称若しくは住所又は認定等の業務を行う事務所の所在地を変更しようとするときは、変更しようとする日の二週間前までに、その旨を国土交通大臣に届け出なければならない。
(2) When a designated approval body intends to change its name, address, or the address of the office where it performs approval work, etc., it must notify the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism to that effect at least two weeks prior to the day of the relevant change.
３　国土交通大臣は、前項の規定による届出があつたときは、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(3) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism receives the notification under the preceding paragraph, the Minister must publicly notify to that effect.
（業務区域の変更）
(Change in Work Area)
第七十七条の四十　指定認定機関は、業務区域を増加し、又は減少しようとするときは、国土交通大臣の許可を受けなければならない。
Article 77-40  (1) When a designated approval body expands or reduces its work area, it must obtain the permission of the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism.
２　第七十七条の三十八第一号及び第二号の規定は、前項の許可について準用する。
(2) The provisions of Article 77-38, items (i) and (ii) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the permission in the preceding paragraph.
３　国土交通大臣は、第一項の許可をしたときは、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(3) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism has given permission under paragraph (1), the Minister must publicly notify to that effect.
（指定の更新）
(Renewal of Designation)
第七十七条の四十一　指定は、五年以上十年以内において政令で定める期間ごとにその更新を受けなければ、その期間の経過によつて、その効力を失う。
Article 77-41  (1) If a designation is not renewed at an interval from five to ten years specified by Cabinet Order, it shall cease to be effective.
２　第七十七条の三十六から第七十七条の三十八までの規定は、前項の指定の更新の場合について準用する。
(2) The provisions of Articles 77-36 through 77-38 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the renewal of designation specified in the preceding paragraph.
（認定員）
(Approvers)
第七十七条の四十二　指定認定機関は、認定等を行うときは、国土交通省令で定める方法に従い、認定員に認定等を実施させなければならない。
Article 77-42  (1) A designated approval body must have its approvers perform approval work, etc. in accordance with a method established by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
２　認定員は、建築技術に関して優れた識見を有する者として国土交通省令で定める要件を備える者のうちから選任しなければならない。
(2) Approvers must be appointed from among people with advanced knowledge concerning building construction technology satisfying requirements specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
３　指定認定機関は、認定員を選任し、又は解任したときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、その旨を国土交通大臣に届け出なければならない。
(3) When a designated approval body appoints or dismisses approvers, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, it must notify the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism to that effect.
４　国土交通大臣は、認定員が、第七十七条の四十五第一項の認可を受けた認定等業務規程に違反したとき、認定等の業務に関し著しく不適当な行為をしたとき、又はその在任により指定認定機関が第七十七条の三十八第三号に掲げる基準に適合しなくなつたときは、指定認定機関に対し、その認定員を解任すべきことを命ずることができる。
(4) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may order a designated approval body to dismiss approvers if they violate the regulations for approval work, etc. approved under Article 77-45, paragraph (1) or act very inappropriately in connection with the relevant work, or the designated approval body does not conform to the criteria set forth in Article 77-38, item (iii) because of the relevant approvers.
（秘密保持義務等）
(Obligation to Maintain Confidentiality)
第七十七条の四十三　指定認定機関（その者が法人である場合にあつては、その役員。次項において同じ。）及びその職員（認定員を含む。次項において同じ。）並びにこれらの者であつた者は、認定等の業務に関して知り得た秘密を漏らし、又は盗用してはならない。
Article 77-43  (1) A designated approval body (in the case of a corporation, directors; the same in the next paragraph), its staff (including approvers; the same in the next paragraph) and any person who was in those positions shall not reveal any confidential information related to approval work, etc., nor shall appropriate this confidential information.
２　指定認定機関及びその職員で認定等の業務に従事するものは、刑法その他の罰則の適用については、法令により公務に従事する職員とみなす。
(2) Regarding the application of the Penal Code and other penal codes, a designated approval body and its staff performing approval work, etc., shall be considered to be government employees engaged in public services by laws and orders.
（認定等の義務）
(Responsibility for Approval)
第七十七条の四十四　指定認定機関は、認定等を行うべきことを求められたときは、正当な理由がある場合を除き、遅滞なく、認定等を行わなければならない。
Article 77-44  A designated approval body must immediately perform approval, etc. upon request, excluding cases where there are justifiable grounds not to do so.
（認定等業務規程）
(Regulations for Approval Work)
第七十七条の四十五　指定認定機関は、認定等の業務に関する規程（以下この節において「認定等業務規程」という。）を定め、国土交通大臣の認可を受けなければならない。これを変更しようとするときも、同様とする。
Article 77-45  (1) A designated approval body must establish regulations concerning the performance of approval work, etc. (referred to in this Section as "regulations for approval work, etc."), and shall obtain the approval of the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism. The same shall apply when the relevant regulations are to be revised.
２　認定等業務規程で定めるべき事項は、国土交通省令で定める。
(2) Items that shall be established by the regulations for approval work, etc. shall be specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
３　国土交通大臣は、第一項の認可をした認定等業務規程が認定等の公正かつ適確な実施上不適当となつたと認めるときは、その認定等業務規程を変更すべきことを命ずることができる。
(3) If the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc. finds that the rules of approval, etc. work approved under paragraph (1) have become no longer appropriate for the impartial and correct performance of approval, the Minister may order the revision of the rules of approval, etc. work.
（国土交通大臣への報告等）
(Reports to the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism)
第七十七条の四十六　指定認定機関は、認定等を行つたときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、国土交通大臣に報告しなければならない。
Article 77-46  (1) When a designated approval body has performed approval work, etc., it must submit a report to the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
２　国土交通大臣は、前項の規定による報告を受けた場合において、指定認定機関が行つた型式適合認定を受けた型式が第一章、第二章（第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）若しくは第三章の規定又はこれに基づく命令の規定に適合しないと認めるときは、当該型式適合認定を受けた者及び当該型式適合認定を行つた指定認定機関にその旨を通知しなければならない。この場合において、当該型式適合認定は、その効力を失う。
(2) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism receives a report under the preceding paragraph, if the Minister finds that the type approved by a designated approval body does not conform to the provisions in Chapter I, II (including cases where these Chapters apply mutatis mutandis in Article 88, paragraph (1)) or III, or the provisions of orders based thereon, the Minister must notify this information to the person who has obtained type approval and the designated approval body that granted the type approval of this fact. In this case, the relevant type-approval shall cease to be effective.
（帳簿の備付け等）
(Bookkeeping)
第七十七条の四十七　指定認定機関は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、認定等の業務に関する事項で国土交通省令で定めるものを記載した帳簿を備え付け、これを保存しなければならない。
Article 77-47  (1) A designated approval body must prepare and keep a book which records items concerning the approval work, etc. specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
２　前項に定めるもののほか、指定認定機関は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、認定等の業務に関する書類で国土交通省令で定めるものを保存しなければならない。
(2) In addition to the provision of the preceding paragraph, a designated approval body must maintain documents concerning its approval work, etc. specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（監督命令）
(Ministerial Orders)
第七十七条の四十八　国土交通大臣は、認定等の業務の公正かつ適確な実施を確保するため必要があると認めるときは、指定認定機関に対し、認定等の業務に関し監督上必要な命令をすることができる。
Article 77-48  If the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism finds it necessary to ensure the impartial and correct performance of approval work, the Minister may issue to designated approval body an order necessary for supervision of the approval work.
（報告、検査等）
(Reporting and Inspections)
第七十七条の四十九　国土交通大臣は、認定等の業務の公正かつ適確な実施を確保するため必要があると認めるときは、指定認定機関に対し認定等の業務に関し必要な報告を求め、又はその職員に、指定認定機関の事務所に立ち入り、認定等の業務の状況若しくは設備、帳簿、書類その他の物件を検査させ、若しくは関係者に質問させることができる。
Article 77-49  (1) If the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism finds it necessary to ensure the impartial and correct performance of the approval work, the Minister may request required reports for the approval work to the designated approval body, or to have its officials enter the office of the body to inspect the state of the approval work, or the facilities, the books, documents, and other objects, or to question related persons.
２　第十五条の二第二項及び第三項の規定は、前項の場合について準用する。
(2) The provisions of Article 15-2, paragraphs (2) and (3) shall apply mutatis mutandis in the case specified in the preceding paragraph.
（認定等の業務の休廃止等）
(Suspension and Abandonment of Approval Work)
第七十七条の五十　指定認定機関は、国土交通大臣の許可を受けなければ、認定等の業務の全部又は一部を休止し、又は廃止してはならない。
Article 77-50  (1) A designated approval body shall not suspend or abandon all or part of its approval work, etc. without obtaining the prior permission of the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism.
２　国土交通大臣が前項の規定により認定等の業務の全部の廃止を許可したときは、当該許可に係る指定は、その効力を失う。
(2) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism has permitted abandonment of all of the approval work, etc. pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the designation to the body that obtains the relevant permission shall cease to be effective.
３　国土交通大臣は、第一項の許可をしたときは、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(3) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism has given permission under paragraph (1), the Minister must publicly notify to that effect.
（指定の取消し等）
(Revocation of Designation)
第七十七条の五十一　国土交通大臣は、指定認定機関が第七十七条の三十七各号（第四号を除く。）の一に該当するに至つたときは、その指定を取り消さなければならない。
Article 77-51  (1) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism must revoke the designation of an approval body when it comes under any one of the items of Article 77-37 (excluding item (iv)).
２　国土交通大臣は、指定認定機関が次の各号の一に該当するときは、その指定を取り消し、又は期間を定めて認定等の業務の全部若しくは一部の停止を命ずることができる。
(2) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may revoke that designation or order the suspension of all or part of the approval work, etc. for a specified period of time, when a designated approval body falls under any of the following items:
一　第七十七条の三十九第二項、第七十七条の四十第一項、第七十七条の四十二第一項から第三項まで、第七十七条の四十四、第七十七条の四十六第一項、第七十七条の四十七又は前条第一項の規定に違反したとき。
(i) the body has violated the provisions of Article 77-39, paragraph (2); Article 77-40, paragraph (1); Article 77-42, paragraphs (1) through (3); Article 77-44; Article 77-46, paragraph (1); Article 77-47; or paragraph (1) of the preceding Article;
二　第七十七条の四十五第一項の認可を受けた認定等業務規程によらないで認定等を行つたとき。
(ii) the body has performed approval work, etc. not in accordance with the regulations for approval work, etc. approved under Article 77-45, paragraph (1);
三　第七十七条の四十二第四項、第七十七条の四十五第三項又は第七十七条の四十八の規定による命令に違反したとき。
(iii) the body has violated orders under Article 77-42, paragraph (4), Article 77-45, paragraph (3), or Article 77-48;
四　第七十七条の三十八各号に掲げる基準に適合していないと認めるとき。
(iv) it is concluded that the body does not conform to the criteria set forth in each item of Article 77-38;
五　認定等の業務に関し著しく不適当な行為をしたとき、又はその業務に従事する認定員若しくは法人にあつてはその役員が、認定等の業務に関し著しく不適当な行為をしたとき。
(v) the body has committed an extremely inappropriate act in connection with the approval work, etc., or an approver engaged in that work or a director in the case of a corporation, committed an extremely inappropriate act in connection with the approval work, etc.;
六　不正な手段により指定を受けたとき。
(vi) the body was designated by illegal means.
３　国土交通大臣は、前二項の規定により指定を取り消し、又は前項の規定による認定等の業務の全部若しくは一部の停止を命じたときは、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(3) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism revokes and the designation pursuant to the provisions of the preceding two paragraphs, or suspends all or part of its approval work under the preceding paragraph, the Minister must publicly notify to that effect.
（国土交通大臣による認定等の実施）
(Performance of Approval by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism)
第七十七条の五十二　国土交通大臣は、指定認定機関が次の各号のいずれかに該当するときは、第六十八条の二十四第二項の規定にかかわらず、当該指定認定機関が休止し、停止を命じられ、又は実施することが困難となつた認定等の業務のうち他の指定認定機関によつて行われないものを自ら行うものとする。
Article 77-52  (1) When a designated approval body comes under any of the following items, the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism shall, irrespective of Article 68-24, paragraph (2), perform the approval work, etc. which was suspended or ordered to be suspended, or which was difficult for the relevant body to perform, and neither of which is performed by other designated approval bodies:
一　第七十七条の五十第一項の規定により認定等の業務の全部又は一部を休止したとき。
(i) the body has suspended all or part of the approval work, etc. pursuant to Article 77-50, paragraph (1);
二　前条第二項の規定により認定等の業務の全部又は一部の停止を命じられたとき。
(ii) the body has been ordered to suspend all or part of the approval work, etc. pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (2) of the preceding Article;
三　天災その他の事由により認定等の業務の全部又は一部を実施することが困難となつた場合において国土交通大臣が必要があると認めるとき。
(iii) the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism concludes that it is difficult for the relevant body to perform the relevant work because of natural disasters or other uncontrollable factors and deems it necessary to perform the relevant work.
２　国土交通大臣は、前項の規定により認定等の業務を行い、又は同項の規定により行つている認定等の業務を行わないこととしようとするときは、あらかじめ、その旨を公示しなければならない。
(2) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism performs approval work pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph, or stops performing the approval work pursuant to the provisions of that paragraph, the Minister must publicly notify to that effect in advance.
３　国土交通大臣が、第一項の規定により認定等の業務を行うこととし、第七十七条の四十第一項の規定により業務区域の減少を許可し、第七十七条の五十第一項の規定により認定等の業務の廃止を許可し、又は前条第一項若しくは第二項の規定により指定を取り消した場合における認定等の業務の引継ぎその他の必要な事項は、国土交通省令で定める。
(3) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism performs approval work, etc. pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (1), or permitted the reduction of the work area pursuant to the provisions of Article 77-40, paragraph (1) or abandonment of approval work, etc. under the provisions of Article 77-50, paragraph (1), or revoked the designation pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (1) or (2) of the preceding Article, succession of approval work, etc. and other necessary items shall be specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（審査請求）
(Investigation Demands)
第七十七条の五十三　この法律の規定による指定認定機関の行う処分又はその不作為については、国土交通大臣に対し、審査請求をすることができる。この場合において、国土交通大臣は、行政不服審査法第二十五条第二項及び第三項、第四十六条第一項及び第二項、第四十七条並びに第四十九条第三項の規定の適用については、指定認定機関の上級行政庁とみなす。
Article 77-53  Investigation demands regarding actions or nonfeasance by a designated approval body under this Act may be made to the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism under the Administrative Appeal Act. In this case, the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism shall deem the designated qualifying examination body for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors to be a higher administrative agency for the purposes of applying the provisions referred to in Article 25, paragraphs (2) and (3); Article 46, paragraphs (1) and (2); Article 47; and Article 49, paragraph (3) of the Administrative Appeal Act.
（承認）
(Recognition)
第七十七条の五十四　第六十八条の二十四第三項（第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。以下この条において同じ。）の規定による承認は、認定等を行おうとする者（外国にある事務所により行おうとする者に限る。）の申請により行う。
Article 77-54  (1) Recognition under Article 68-24, paragraph (3) (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 88, paragraph (1); the same in this Article.) shall be given in response to an application by those wishing to perform approval, etc. (limited to the person performing the work at an overseas office).
２　第七十七条の三十六第二項の規定は前項の申請に、第七十七条の三十七、第七十七条の三十八、第七十七条の三十九第一項及び第七十七条の四十一の規定は第六十八条の二十四第三項の規定による承認に、第七十七条の二十二（第三項後段を除く。）、第七十七条の三十四、第七十七条の三十九第二項及び第三項、第七十七条の四十二、第七十七条の四十四、第七十七条の四十五、第七十七条の四十六第一項並びに第七十七条の四十七から第七十七条の四十九までの規定は第六十八条の二十四第三項の規定による承認を受けた者（以下この条、次条及び第九十七条の四において「承認認定機関」という。）に、第七十七条の四十六第二項の規定は承認認定機関が行つた認定等について準用する。この場合において、第七十七条の二十二第一項、第二項及び第四項並びに第七十七条の三十四第一項及び第三項中「国土交通大臣等」とあるのは「国土交通大臣」と、第七十七条の二十二第三項前段中「第七十七条の十八第三項及び第七十七条の二十第一号から第四号までの規定」とあるのは「第七十七条の三十八第一号及び第二号の規定」と、第七十七条の四十二第四項及び第七十七条の四十五第三項中「命ずる」とあるのは「請求する」と、第七十七条の四十八中「命令」とあるのは「請求」と読み替えるものとする。
(2) The provision of Article 77-36, paragraph (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the application specified in the preceding paragraph, the provisions of Article 77-37, Article 77-38, Article 77-39 paragraph (1), and Article 77-41 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the recognition under Article 68-24 paragraph (3), the provisions of Article 77-22 (excluding the latter part of paragraph (3)), Article 77-34, Article 77-39, paragraph (2) and (3), Article 77-42, Article 77-44, Article 77-45, Article 77-46, paragraph (1), and Articles 77-47 through 77-49 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the person recognized under Article 68-24, paragraph (3) (hereinafter in this Article, the next Article, and Article 97-4, referred to as "recognized approval body"), and the provision of Article 77-46, paragraph (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis to approval, etc. performed by the recognized approval body. In this case, the term "Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc." in Article 77-22, paragraphs (1), (2), and (4), and in Article 77-34, paragraphs (1) and (3) shall be replaced with "Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism," "provisions of Article 77-18, paragraph (3) and Article 77-20, items (i) through (iv)" in the first part of Article 77-22, paragraph (3) shall be replaced with "provisions of Article 77-38, items (i) and (ii)," and "order(s)" in Article 77-42, paragraph (4), Article 77-45, paragraph (3), and Article 77-48 shall be replaced with "request(s)".
（承認の取消し等）
(Revocation of Recognition)
第七十七条の五十五　国土交通大臣は、承認認定機関が前条第二項において準用する第七十七条の三十七各号（第四号を除く。）の一に該当するに至つたときは、その承認を取り消さなければならない。
Article 77-55  (1) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism must revoke the recognition of a recognized approval body when it comes under any one of the items of Article 77-37 (excluding item (iv)) applied mutatis mutandis in paragraph (2) of the preceding Article.
２　国土交通大臣は、承認認定機関が次の各号の一に該当するときは、その承認を取り消すことができる。
(2) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may revoke the recognition of a recognized approval body when it comes under any one of the following items:
一　前条第二項において準用する第七十七条の二十二第一項若しくは第二項、第七十七条の三十四第一項、第七十七条の三十九第二項、第七十七条の四十二第一項から第三項まで、第七十七条の四十四、第七十七条の四十六第一項又は第七十七条の四十七の規定に違反したとき。
(i) the body has violated a provision of Article 77-22, paragraph (1) or (2); Article 77-34, paragraph (1); Article 77-39, paragraph (2); Article 77-42, paragraphs (1) through (3); Article 77-44; Article 77-46, paragraph (1); or Article 77-47 applied mutatis mutandis in paragraph (2) of the preceding Article;
二　前条第二項において準用する第七十七条の四十五第一項の認可を受けた認定等業務規程によらないで認定等を行つたとき。
(ii) the body has performed approval, etc. not in accordance with the regulations for approval work, etc. approved under Article 77-45, paragraph (1) applied mutatis mutandis in paragraph (2) of the preceding Article;
三　前条第二項において準用する第七十七条の四十二第四項、第七十七条の四十五第三項又は第七十七条の四十八の規定による請求に応じなかつたとき。
(iii) the body has failed to respond to the requests under Article 77-42 paragraph (4), Article 77-45 paragraph (3), or Article 77-48 applied mutatis mutandis in paragraph (2) of the preceding Article;
四　前条第二項において準用する第七十七条の三十八各号に掲げる基準に適合していないと認めるとき。
(iv) it is concluded that the body does not conform to the criteria set forth in each item of Article 77-38 applied mutatis mutandis in paragraph (2) of the preceding Article;
五　認定等の業務に関し著しく不適当な行為をしたとき、又はその業務に従事する認定員若しくは法人にあつてはその役員が、認定等の業務に関し著しく不適当な行為をしたとき。
(v) the body, its approver, or director in the case of a corporation, has acted very inappropriately in connection with the approval work, etc.;
六　不正な手段により承認を受けたとき。
(vi) the body was recognized by illegal means;
七　国土交通大臣が、承認認定機関が前各号の一に該当すると認めて、期間を定めて認定等の業務の全部又は一部の停止の請求をした場合において、その請求に応じなかつたとき。
(vii) the body has failed to request by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, when the Minister finds that a recognized approval body falls under any of the preceding items, and requests the suspension of all or part of the approval work, etc. for a specified period of time;
八　前条第二項において準用する第七十七条の四十九第一項の規定による報告をせず、又は虚偽の報告をしたとき。
(viii) the body has failed to report under Article 77-49, paragraph (1) applied mutatis mutandis in paragraph (2) of the preceding Article, or has submitted a false report;
九　前条第二項において準用する第七十七条の四十九第一項の規定による検査を拒み、妨げ、若しくは忌避し、又は同項の規定による質問に対して答弁をせず、若しくは虚偽の答弁をしたとき。
(ix) the body has refused, obstructed, or evaded inspections under Article 77-49, paragraph (1) applied mutatis mutandis in paragraph (2) of the preceding Article or has refused to answer questions under that paragraph, or has given false answers;
十　次項の規定による費用の負担をしないとき。
(x) the body does not bear expenses under the next paragraph.
３　前条第二項において準用する第七十七条の四十九第一項の規定による検査に要する費用（政令で定めるものに限る。）は、当該検査を受ける承認認定機関の負担とする。
(3) Expenses required for the inspection under Article 77-49, paragraph (1) applied mutatis mutandis in paragraph (2) of the preceding Article (limited to those specified by Cabinet Order) shall be borne by the recognized approval body that receives the relevant inspection.
第五節　指定性能評価機関等
Section 5 Designated Performance Evaluation Body
（指定性能評価機関）
(Designated Performance Evaluation Body)
第七十七条の五十六　第六十八条の二十五第三項（第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。以下この条において同じ。）の規定による指定は、第六十八条の二十五第三項の評価（以下「性能評価」という。）を行おうとする者（外国にある事務所により行おうとする者を除く。）の申請により行う。
Article 77-56  (1) The designation under Article 68-25, paragraph (3) (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 88, paragraph (1); the same in this Article) shall be performed in response to an application by those wishing to perform evaluations under Article 68-25, paragraph (3) (hereinafter referred to as "performance evaluations") (excluding the person performing the work at an overseas office).
２　第七十七条の三十六第二項の規定は前項の申請に、第七十七条の三十七、第七十七条の三十八、第七十七条の三十九第一項及び第七十七条の四十一の規定は第六十八条の二十五第三項の規定による指定に、第七十七条の三十九第二項及び第三項、第七十七条の四十、第七十七条の四十二から第七十七条の四十五まで並びに第七十七条の四十七から第七十七条の五十二までの規定は前項の規定による指定を受けた者（以下この条、第九十七条の四及び第百条において「指定性能評価機関」という。）に、第七十七条の五十三の規定は指定性能評価機関の行う性能評価又はその不作為について準用する。この場合において、第七十七条の三十八第一号、第七十七条の四十二、第七十七条の四十三第一項及び第七十七条の五十一第二項第五号中「認定員」とあるのは「評価員」と、同項第一号中「第七十七条の四十六第一項、第七十七条の四十七」とあるのは「第七十七条の四十七」と、第七十七条の五十三中「処分」とあるのは「処分（性能評価の結果を除く。）」と読み替えるものとする。
(2) The provision of Article 77-36, paragraph (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the application specified in the preceding paragraph, the provisions of Article 77-37, Article 77-38, Article 77-39, paragraph (1), and Article 77-41 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the designation under Article 68-25, Paragraph (3), the provisions of Article 77-39, paragraphs (2) and (3), Article 77-40, Articles 77-42 through 77-45, and Articles 77-47 through 77-52 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the person designated under the preceding paragraph (hereinafter in this Article, Article 97-4, and Article 100, referred to as "designated performance evaluation body"), and the provision of Article 77-53 shall apply mutatis mutandis to performance evaluations performed by a designated performance evaluation body, or failure to carry out those evaluations. In this case, the term "approvers" in Article 77-38, item (1), Article 77-42, Article 77-43, paragraph (1), and Article 77-51, paragraph (2), item (v) shall be replaced with "evaluators", "Article 77-46, paragraph (1) and Article 77-47" in item (i) of that paragraph shall be replaced with "Article 77-47", and "action" in Article 77-53 shall be replaced with "action (excluding results of performance evaluations)".
（承認性能評価機関）
(Recognized Performance Evaluation Body)
第七十七条の五十七　第六十八条の二十五第六項（第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。以下この条において同じ。）の規定による承認は、性能評価を行おうとする者（外国にある事務所により行おうとする者に限る。）の申請により行う。
Article 77-57  (1) The approval under Article 68-25, paragraph (6) (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 88, paragraph (1); the same in this Article) shall be given in response to an application by those wishing to perform performance evaluations (limited to the person performing the work at an overseas office).
２　第七十七条の三十六第二項の規定は前項の申請に、第七十七条の三十七、第七十七条の三十八、第七十七条の三十九第一項及び第七十七条の四十一の規定は第六十八条の二十五第六項の規定による承認に、第七十七条の二十二（第三項後段を除く。）、第七十七条の三十四、第七十七条の三十九第二項及び第三項、第七十七条の四十二、第七十七条の四十四、第七十七条の四十五、第七十七条の四十七から第七十七条の四十九まで並びに第七十七条の五十五の規定は第六十八条の二十五第六項の規定による承認を受けた者（第九十七条の四において「承認性能評価機関」という。）について準用する。この場合において、第七十七条の二十二第一項、第二項及び第四項並びに第七十七条の三十四第一項及び第三項中「国土交通大臣等」とあるのは「国土交通大臣」と、第七十七条の二十二第三項前段中「第七十七条の十八第三項及び第七十七条の二十第一号から第四号までの規定」とあるのは「第七十七条の三十八第一号及び第二号の規定」と、第七十七条の三十八第一号、第七十七条の四十二及び第七十七条の五十五第二項第五号中「認定員」とあるのは「評価員」と、第七十七条の四十二第四項及び第七十七条の四十五第三項中「命ずる」とあるのは「請求する」と、第七十七条の四十八中「命令」とあるのは「請求」と、第七十七条の五十五第二項第一号中「、第七十七条の四十六第一項又は第七十七条の四十七」とあるのは「又は第七十七条の四十七」と読み替えるものとする。
(2) The provision of Article 77-36, paragraph (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the application specified in the preceding paragraph; the provisions of Article 77-37, Article 77-38, Article 77-39, paragraph (1), and Article 77-41 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the recognition under Article 68-25, paragraph (6); the provisions of Article 77-22 (excluding the latter part of paragraph (3)), Article 77-34, Article 77-39, paragraphs (2) and (3), Article 77-42, Article 77-44, Article 77-45, and Articles 77-47 through 77-49, and Article 77-55 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the person recognized under Article 68-25, paragraph (6) (hereinafter in Article 97-4 referred to as "recognized performance evaluation body"). In this case, the term " Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, etc." in Article 77-22 paragraphs (1), (2) and (4), and Article 77-34, paragraphs (1) and (3) shall be replaced with " Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism"; "the provisions of Article 77-18, paragraph (3) and Article 77-20, items (i) through (iv)" in the first part of Article 77-22, paragraph (3) shall be replaced with "the provisions of Article 77-38, items (i) and (ii)"; "approvers" in Article 77-38, item (i), Article 77-42, and Article 77-55, paragraph (2), item (v) shall be replaced with "evaluators," "order(s)" in Article 77-42, paragraph (4), Article 77-45, paragraph (3), and Article 77-48 shall be replaced with "request(s)," and "Article 77-46, paragraph (1) or Article 77-47" in Article 77-55, paragraph (2), item (i) shall be replaced with "or Article 77-47".
第四章の三　建築基準適合判定資格者等の登録
Chapter IV-3 Registration of Qualified Building Regulation Conformity Inspectors
第一節　建築基準適合判定資格者の登録
Section 1 Registration of Qualified Building Regulation Conformity Inspectors
（登録）
(Registration)
第七十七条の五十八　建築基準適合判定資格者検定に合格した者は、国土交通大臣の登録を受けることができる。
Article 77-58  (1) A person who has passed the qualifying examination for building regulation conformity inspectors may be registered by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism.
２　前項の登録は、国土交通大臣が建築基準適合判定資格者登録簿に、氏名、生年月日、住所その他の国土交通省令で定める事項を登載してするものとする。
(2) The registration specified in the preceding paragraph shall be performed by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, recording the name, date of birth, address, and other items specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order in the register of qualified building regulation conformity inspectors.
（欠格条項）
(Disqualification)
第七十七条の五十九　次の各号のいずれかに該当する者は、前条第一項の登録を受けることができない。
Article 77-59  A person coming under any of the following items is not able to be registered under paragraph (1) of the preceding Article:
一　未成年者
(i) a Minor;
二　禁錮以上の刑に処せられ、又は建築基準法令の規定若しくは建築士法の規定により刑に処せられ、その執行を終わり、又は執行を受けることがなくなつた日から起算して五年を経過しない者
(ii) a person who has been sentenced to imprisonment or a higher penalty, or sentenced to punishment pursuant to the provisions of building standard laws and regulations, and for whom five years have not yet elapsed since the date on which relevant execution has been completed or has become no longer subject to execution;
三　第七十七条の六十二第一項第四号又は第二項第三号から第五号までの規定により前条第一項の登録を消除され、その消除の日から起算して五年を経過しない者
(iii) a person whose registration under paragraph (1) of the preceding paragraph has been deleted pursuant to the provisions of Article 77-62, paragraph (1), item (iv) or paragraph (2), items (iii) through (v), and for whom five years have not yet elapsed since the date of the relevant deletion;
四　第七十七条の六十二第二項第三号から第五号までの規定により確認検査の業務を行うことを禁止され、その禁止の期間中に同条第一項第一号の規定により前条第一項の登録を消除され、まだその期間が経過しない者
(iv) a person who has been prohibited from performing confirmation and inspection pursuant to the provisions of Article 77-62, paragraph (2), items (iii) through (v) and whose registration under paragraph (1) of the preceding Article has been deleted during the relevant period of the prohibition pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (1), item (i) of that paragraph and the relevant period has not elapsed;
五　建築士法第七条第四号に該当する者
(v) a person coming under Article 7, item (iv) of the Act on Architects and Building Engineers;
六　公務員で懲戒免職の処分を受け、その処分の日から起算して三年を経過しない者
(vi) a government employee that has been subject to a disposition of disciplinary dismissal, and for whom three years have not yet elapsed since the date of the relevant disposition.
第七十七条の五十九の二　国土交通大臣は、心身の故障により確認検査の業務を適正に行うことができない者として国土交通省令で定めるものについては、第七十七条の五十八第一項の登録をしないことができる。
Article 77-59-2  The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may not perform the registration under Article 77-58, paragraph (1) of a person deemed by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order as a person incapable of performing the confirmation and inspection work appropriately due to mental or physical incapacitation.
（変更の登録）
(Registration of Revisions, etc.)
第七十七条の六十　第七十七条の五十八第一項の登録を受けている者（次条及び第七十七条の六十二第二項において「建築基準適合判定資格者」という。）は、当該登録を受けている事項で国土交通省令で定めるものに変更があつたときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、変更の登録を申請しなければならない。
Article 77-60  A person registered under Article 77-58, paragraph (1) (referred to as "qualified building regulation conformity inspector" in the next Article and in Article 77-62, paragraph (2)) must apply for a revision to the registration as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, when there has been a change in items subject to the relevant registration specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（死亡等の届出）
(Notice of Death)
第七十七条の六十一　建築基準適合判定資格者が次の各号のいずれかに該当するときは、当該各号に定める者は、当該建築基準適合判定資格者が当該各号に該当するに至つた日（第一号の場合にあつては、その事実を知つた日）から三十日以内に、国土交通大臣にその旨を届け出なければならない。
Article 77-61  When a qualified building regulation conformity inspector comes under any of the following items, the person provided for in each item must notify the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism to that effect within 30 days from the day that the relevant inspector has come under one of those items (in the case of item (i), from the day that the fact becomes known):
一　死亡したとき　相続人
(i) death: a successor;
二　第七十七条の五十九第二号、第五号又は第六号に該当するに至つたとき　本人
(ii) when coming under Article 77-59, item (ii), (v), or (vi): a guardian or assistant;
三　心身の故障により確認検査の業務を適正に行うことができない場合に該当するものとして国土交通省令で定める場合に該当するに至つたとき　本人又はその法定代理人若しくは同居の親族
(iii) when coming under cases specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order as a person who is incapable of performing the confirmation and inspection work appropriately due to mental or physical incapacitation: the individual, that person's legal guardian or that person's co-residing relative.
（登録の消除等）
(Deletion of Registration)
第七十七条の六十二　国土交通大臣は、次の各号のいずれかに掲げる場合は、第七十七条の五十八第一項の登録を消除しなければならない。
Article 77-62  (1) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism must delete the registration specified in Article 77-58, paragraph (1) in case of any one of the following items:
一　本人から登録の消除の申請があつたとき。
(i) when the qualified building regulation conformity inspector has requested deletion of the registration;
二　前条（第三号に係る部分を除く。次号において同じ。）の規定による届出があつたとき。
(ii) when a notice under the preceding Article (excluding parts related to item (iii); the same shall apply in the next item) has been submitted;
三　前条の規定による届出がなくて同条第一号又は第二号に該当する事実が判明したとき。
(iii) when it has been revealed that a condition corresponding to item (i) or item (ii) of that Article exists even without a notice under the preceding Article;
四　不正な手段により登録を受けたとき。
(iv) the registration was made by illegal means;
五　第五条第六項又は第五条の二第二項の規定により、建築基準適合判定資格者検定の合格の決定を取り消されたとき。
(v) when the qualification for the building regulation conformity inspector has been canceled pursuant to the provisions of Article 5, paragraph (6) or Article 5-2, paragraph (2).
２　国土交通大臣は、建築基準適合判定資格者が次の各号のいずれかに該当するときは、一年以内の期間を定めて確認検査の業務を行うことを禁止し、又はその登録を消除することができる。
(2) The Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism may either prohibit the qualified building regulation conformity inspector from performing confirmation and inspection work for a specified period of one year or less, or delete the relevant registration when the relevant inspector comes under any of the following items:
一　前条（第三号に係る部分に限る。次号において同じ。）の規定による届出があつたとき。
(i) when a notice has been given under the preceding Article (limited to the parts related to item (iii); the same shall apply in the next item);
二　前条の規定による届出がなくて同条第三号に該当する事実が判明したとき。
(ii) when no notice has been given under the preceding Article and a fact coming under item (iii) of that Article has been identified;
三　第十八条の三第三項の規定に違反して、確認審査等を実施したとき。
(iii) when the relevant inspector has performed confirmation and inspection work while violating the provisions of Article 18-3, paragraph (3);
四　第七十七条の二十七第一項の認可を受けた確認検査業務規程に違反したとき。
(iv) when the relevant inspector has violated the regulations for confirmation and inspection work approved under Article 77-27, paragraph (1);
五　確認検査の業務に関し著しく不適当な行為をしたとき。
(v) when the relevant inspector has acted very inappropriately in connection with the confirmation and inspection work.
３　国土交通大臣は、前二項の規定による処分をしたときは、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、その旨を公告しなければならない。
(3) When the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism performs the disposal under the preceding two paragraphs, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, the Minister must give public notice to that effect
（都道府県知事の経由）
(Through the Prefectural Governor)
第七十七条の六十三　第七十七条の五十八第一項の登録の申請、登録証の交付、訂正、再交付及び返納その他の同項の登録に関する国土交通大臣への書類の提出は、住所地又は勤務地の都道府県知事を経由して行わなければならない。
Article 77-63  (1) The submission of documents to the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism concerning the application for registration under Article 77-58, paragraph (1), the issuing, revision, reissuing, and return of a registration certificate, and others concerning registrations under that paragraph must be carried out through the prefectural governor of the place where the submitting person lives or works.
２　登録証の交付及び再交付その他の第七十七条の五十八第一項の登録に関する国土交通大臣の書類の交付は、住所地又は勤務地の都道府県知事を経由して行うものとする。
(2) The issuing of documents by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism concerning issuing and reissuing of registration certificate and registration under Article 77-58, paragraph (1) shall be done through the prefectural governor of the place where the submitting person lives or works.
（国土交通省令への委任）
(Entrustment to Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order)
第七十七条の六十四　第七十七条の五十八から前条までに規定するもののほか、第七十七条の五十八第一項の登録の申請、登録証の交付、訂正、再交付及び返納その他の同項の登録に関する事項は、国土交通省令で定める。
Article 77-64  In addition to the provisions from Article 77-58 through the preceding Article, the application for registration under Article 77-58, paragraph (1), the issuing, revision, reissuing, and return of a registration certificate, and other items concerning registrations under that paragraph shall be specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（手数料）
(Fee)
第七十七条の六十五　第七十七条の五十八第一項の登録又は登録証の訂正若しくは再交付の申請をしようとする者（市町村又は都道府県の職員である者を除く。）は、政令で定めるところにより、実費を勘案して政令で定める額の手数料を国に納めなければならない。
Article 77-65  A person applying for registration or the revision or reissuance of a registration certificate under Article 77-58, paragraph (1) (excluding the officials of a city, town, village, or prefecture) must pay to the national government a registration fee specified by Cabinet Order after calculating actual expenses, as specified by Cabinet Order.
第二節　構造計算適合判定資格者の登録
Section 2 Registration of Qualified Structural Calculation Reviewers
第七十七条の六十六　構造計算適合判定資格者検定に合格した者又はこれと同等以上の知識及び経験を有する者として国土交通省令で定める者は、国土交通大臣の登録を受けることができる。
Article 77-66  (1) A person who has passed the qualifying examination for structural calculation conformity reviewers or who has been deemed by the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism to have equivalent or superior knowledge and experience can be registered by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism.
２　第七十七条の五十八第二項、第七十七条の五十九、第七十七条の五十九の二、第七十七条の六十二第一項及び第三項（同条第一項に係る部分に限る。）並びに第七十七条の六十三から前条までの規定は前項の登録に、第七十七条の六十、第七十七条の六十一並びに第七十七条の六十二第二項及び第三項（同条第二項に係る部分に限る。）の規定は前項の登録を受けている者について準用する。この場合において、第七十七条の五十九第四号、第七十七条の五十九の二、第七十七条の六十一第三号及び第七十七条の六十二第二項第五号中「確認検査」とあるのは「構造計算適合性判定」と、同条第一項第五号中「第五条第六項又は第五条の二第二項」とあるのは「第五条の四第五項において準用する第五条第六項又は第五条の五第二項において準用する第五条の二第二項」と、同条第二項中「定めて確認検査」とあるのは「定めて構造計算適合性判定」と、同項第四号中「第七十七条の二十七第一項」とあるのは「第七十七条の三十五の十二第一項」と、「確認検査業務規程」とあるのは「構造計算適合性判定業務規程」と、前条中「者（市町村又は都道府県の職員である者を除く。）」とあるのは「者」と読み替えるものとする。
(2) The provisions of Article 77-58, paragraph (2), Article 77-59, Article 77-59-2, Article 77-62, paragraphs (1) and (3) (limited to parts relating to paragraph (1) of that Article), and Article 77-63 through to the preceding Article shall be applied to registrations under the provisions of the preceding paragraph; and the provisions of Article 77-60, Article 77-61, and Article 77-62, paragraphs (2) and (3) (limited to parts relating to paragraph (2) of that Article) to a person who is registered under the provisions of the preceding paragraph, mutatis mutandis. In this case, "confirmation inspections" in Article 77-59, item (iv), Article 77-59-2, Article 61, paragraph (3) and Article 77-62, paragraph (2), item (v) shall be read as "structural calculation conformity reviews"; "Article 5, paragraph (6), or Article 5-2, paragraph (2)" in paragraph (1), item (v) of that Article as "Article 5, paragraph (6) applied mutatis mutandis to Article 5-4, paragraph (5), or Article 5-2, paragraph (2) applied mutatis mutandis to Article 5-5, paragraph (2)"; "confirmation and inspection work for a specified period of time" in paragraph (2) of that Article as "structural calculation conformity reviews for a specified period of time", "Article 77-27, paragraph (1)" in paragraph (4) of that Article as "Article 77-35-12, paragraph (1)"; "confirmation inspection regulations" as "structural calculation conformity review regulations"; and "a person (excluding the officials of a city, town, village, or prefecture)" in the preceding Article as "a person".
第五章　建築審査会
Chapter V Building Review Council
（建築審査会）
(Building Review Council)
第七十八条　この法律に規定する同意及び第九十四条第一項前段の審査請求に対する裁決についての議決を行わせるとともに、特定行政庁の諮問に応じて、この法律の施行に関する重要事項を調査審議させるために、建築主事を置く市町村及び都道府県に、建築審査会を置く。
Article 78  (1) A Building Review Council shall be established in any city, town, village having building officials or in any prefecture in order to decide by vote on items requiring its consent as specified in this Act and on rulings as to investigation demands made under the part of Article 94, paragraph (1), and further, to investigate and deliberate on important items concerning the enforcement of this Act in response to inquiries of the Designated Administrative Agency.
２　建築審査会は、前項に規定する事務を行う外、この法律の施行に関する事項について、関係行政機関に対し建議することができる。
(2) In addition to conducting affairs as specified in the preceding paragraph, the Building Review Council may make suggestions to related administrative organs on items concerning the enforcement of this Act.
（建築審査会の組織）
(Organization of Building Review Councils)
第七十九条　建築審査会は、委員五人以上をもつて組織する。
Article 79  (1) A Building Review Council shall be composed of five or more members.
２　委員は、法律、経済、建築、都市計画、公衆衛生又は行政に関しすぐれた経験と知識を有し、公共の福祉に関し公正な判断をすることができる者のうちから、市町村長又は都道府県知事が任命する。
(2) The members shall be appointed by the mayor of the municipality, or by the prefectural governor from among persons of superior learning and experience in the field of laws, economy, architecture, city planning, public sanitation or administration, that are capable of giving fair judgment on items concerning the public welfare.
（委員の欠格条項）
(Disqualification of Members)
第八十条　次の各号のいずれかに該当する者は、委員となることができない。
Article 80  Any person coming under any of the following items may not become a member:
一　破産手続開始の決定を受けて復権を得ない者
(i) a person that has been ordered to begin bankruptcy procedures and is unable to be reinstated;
二　禁錮以上の刑に処せられ、その執行を終わるまで又はその執行を受けることがなくなるまでの者
(ii) a person who was sentenced to imprisonment or a more severe punishment and has not yet completed that sentence or become no longer subject to it.
（委員の解任）
(Dismissal of Members)
第八十条の二　市町村長又は都道府県知事は、それぞれその任命に係る委員が前条各号のいずれかに該当するに至つた場合においては、その委員を解任しなければならない。
Article 80-2  (1) If a member pertaining to their appointment by each of the mayor of municipality or the prefectural governor comes under any of the items of the preceding Article, the mayor or the governor must dismiss that member.
２　市町村長又は都道府県知事は、それぞれその任命に係る委員が次の各号のいずれかに該当する場合においては、その委員を解任することができる。
(2) If a member pertaining to their appointment by each of the mayor of municipality or the prefectural governor comes under any of the following items, the mayor or the governor may dismiss that member:
一　心身の故障のため職務の執行に堪えないと認められる場合
(i) if it is concluded that the member cannot perform the member's duty because of mental or physical incapacitation;
二　職務上の義務違反その他委員たるに適しない非行があると認められる場合
(ii) if it is concluded that the member has swerved from the member's duty and has conducted malfeasance unsuitable for a member.
（会長）
(President)
第八十一条　建築審査会に会長を置く。会長は、委員が互選する。
Article 81  (1) The Building Review Council shall have a president. The president shall be elected through co-optation by the members.
２　会長は、会務を総理し、建築審査会を代表する。
(2) The president shall preside over the affairs of the Council and represent the Building Review Council.
３　会長に事故があるときは、委員のうちからあらかじめ互選された者が、その職務を代理する。
(3) If the president becomes incapacitated, any member selected in advance through co-optation by the members shall act in the president's stead.
（委員の除斥）
(Exclusion of Members)
第八十二条　委員は、自己又は三親等以内の親族の利害に関係のある事件については、この法律に規定する同意又は第九十四条第一項前段の審査請求に対する裁決に関する議事に加わることができない。
Article 82  No member shall, with respect to any case of interest to the member's own or kin within third grade kinship, take part in any proceeding concerning decisions on consent as specified in this Act or investigation demands made under the first part of Article 94, paragraph (1).
（条例への委任）
(Entrustment to Ordinances)
第八十三条　この章に規定するものを除くほか、建築審査会の組織、議事並びに委員の任期、報酬及び費用弁償その他建築審査会に関して必要な事項は、条例で定める。この場合において、委員の任期については、国土交通省令で定める基準を参酌するものとする。
Article 83  In addition to the provisions of this Chapter, the organization of the Building Review Council, Council proceedings, and compensation, payment of expenses to members, terms of office of members and other necessary items concerning the Building Review Council shall be provided by ordinances. In this case, the terms of office of Council members shall be determined with reference to the standards specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
第六章　雑則
Chapter VI Miscellaneous Provisions
（被災市街地における建築制限）
(Building Restrictions in Afflicted Urban Areas)
第八十四条　特定行政庁は、市街地に災害のあつた場合において都市計画又は土地区画整理法による土地区画整理事業のため必要があると認めるときは、区域を指定し、災害が発生した日から一月以内の期間を限り、その区域内における建築物の建築を制限し、又は禁止することができる。
Article 84  (1) In case of a disaster in an urban area, if the Designated Administrative Agency finds it necessary for the City Planning or the land readjustment project under the Land Readjustment Act, it is able to designate areas and restrict or prohibit the construction of buildings therein, for a limited period of time within one month from the day of the occurrence of the disaster.
２　特定行政庁は、更に一月を超えない範囲内において前項の期間を延長することができる。
(2) The Designated Administrative Agency may extend the period in the preceding paragraph within a range that does not exceed an additional one month.
（簡易な構造の建築物に対する制限の緩和）
(Relaxation of Restrictions on Buildings with Simple Construction)
第八十四条の二　壁を有しない自動車車庫、屋根を帆布としたスポーツの練習場その他の政令で指定する簡易な構造の建築物又は建築物の部分で、政令で定める基準に適合するものについては、第二十二条から第二十六条まで、第二十七条第一項及び第三項、第三十五条の二、第六十一条、第六十二条並びに第六十七条第一項の規定は、適用しない。
Article 84-2  The provisions of Articles 22 through 26, Article 27, paragraph (1) and 3, Article 35-2, Articles 61, Article 62 and Article 67, paragraph (1) shall not apply to buildings or parts of buildings with simple construction which are designated by Cabinet Order such as automobile garages without walls or sports practice facilities with canvas roofs for example, and which conform to standards established by Cabinet Order.
（仮設建築物に対する制限の緩和）
(Relaxation of Restrictions on Temporary Buildings)
第八十五条　非常災害があつた場合において、非常災害区域等（非常災害が発生した区域又はこれに隣接する区域で特定行政庁が指定するものをいう。第八十七条の三第一項において同じ。）内においては、災害により破損した建築物の応急の修繕又は次の各号のいずれかに該当する応急仮設建築物の建築でその災害が発生した日から一月以内にその工事に着手するものについては、建築基準法令の規定は、適用しない。ただし、防火地域内に建築する場合については、この限りでない。
Article 85  (1) In the case of a serious disaster, the provisions of building standard laws and regulations shall not apply to the emergency repair of buildings destroyed in the disaster or the construction of emergency temporary buildings coming under any of the following items, which begins within one month from the day of the occurrence of the disaster within the serious disaster area, etc. (which means the area where the serious disaster has occurred or adjacent areas thereto as designated by the Designated Administrative Agency; the same shall apply in Article 87-3, Paragraph (1)). Provided, however, that this shall not apply in cases where construction is executed within Fire Prevention Districts:
一　国、地方公共団体又は日本赤十字社が災害救助のために建築するもの
(i) buildings for relief constructed by the State, local government or Japan Red Cross Society;
二　被災者が自ら使用するために建築するもので延べ面積が三十平方メートル以内のもの
(ii) buildings constructed by disaster victims for their own use, the total floor area of which does not exceed 30 square meters.
２　災害があつた場合において建築する停車場、官公署その他これらに類する公益上必要な用途に供する応急仮設建築物又は工事を施工するために現場に設ける事務所、下小屋、材料置場その他これらに類する仮設建築物については、第六条から第七条の六まで、第十二条第一項から第四項まで、第十五条、第十八条（第二十五項を除く。）、第十九条、第二十一条から第二十三条まで、第二十六条、第三十一条、第三十三条、第三十四条第二項、第三十五条、第三十六条（第十九条、第二十一条、第二十六条、第三十一条、第三十三条、第三十四条第二項及び第三十五条に係る部分に限る。）、第三十七条、第三十九条及び第四十条の規定並びに第三章の規定は、適用しない。ただし、防火地域又は準防火地域内にある延べ面積が五十平方メートルを超えるものについては、第六十二条の規定の適用があるものとする。
(2) The provisions of Articles 6 through 7-6, Article 12 paragraphs (1) through (4), Article 15, Article 18 (excluding paragraph 25), Article 19, Articles 21 through 23, Article 26, Article 31, Article 33, Article 34, paragraph (2), Article 35, Article 36 (limited to parts which pertain to Article 19, Article 21, Article 26, Article 31, Article 33, Article 34, paragraph (2), and Article 35), Article 37, Article 39 and Article 40, and the provisions of Chapter III shall not apply to those buildings which are constructed in disasters, such as stations, government and public offices or other emergency temporary buildings similar thereto offered for use necessary for the public interest, or to offices, sheds, storage facilities for construction materials or other temporary buildings similar thereto provided in construction fields for the execution of construction work. Provided, however, that the provisions referred to in Article 62 shall apply to any building of which total floor area exceeds 50 square meters in Fire Prevention Districts or Quasi-fire Prevention Districts.
３　前二項の応急仮設建築物を建築した者は、その建築工事を完了した後三月を超えて当該建築物を存続させようとする場合においては、その超えることとなる日前に、特定行政庁の許可を受けなければならない。ただし、当該許可の申請をした場合において、その超えることとなる日前に当該申請に対する処分がされないときは、当該処分がされるまでの間は、なお当該建築物を存続させることができる。
(3) If a person who has constructed an emergency temporary building under the preceding two paragraphs intends to leave the relevant building as is for more than three months after the completion of construction, that person must obtain permission from the Designated Administrative Agency the day before that period is exceeded. Provided, however, that when the person has applied for the relevant permission, but action has not been taken to deal with the application by the day before the three-month period is exceeded, it shall be possible to leave the relevant building as is until the relevant action has been taken.
４　特定行政庁は、前項の許可の申請があつた場合において、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めるときは、二年以内の期間を限つて、その許可をすることができる。
(4) When that an application for permission in the preceding paragraph has been made, if the Designated Administrative Agency finds that the permission is not detrimental for safety, fire prevention, and sanitation, it may give relevant permission for a limited period of time within two years.
５　特定行政庁は、仮設興行場、博覧会建築物、仮設店舗その他これらに類する仮設建築物（次項及び第百一条第一項第十号において「仮設興行場等」という。）について安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認める場合においては、一年以内の期間（建築物の工事を施工するためその工事期間中当該従前の建築物に代えて必要となる仮設店舗その他の仮設建築物については、特定行政庁が当該工事の施工上必要と認める期間）を定めてその建築を許可することができる。この場合においては、第十二条第一項から第四項まで、第二十一条から第二十七条まで、第三十一条、第三十四条第二項、第三十五条の二、第三十五条の三及び第三十七条の規定並びに第三章の規定は、適用しない。
(5) With respect to temporary play houses, pavilions, temporary stores and other temporary buildings similar thereto (to be referred to as a "temporary playhouse, etc." in the next paragraph and in Article 101, paragraph (1), item (x)), the Designated Administrative Agency may, if it concludes that there is no objection from the viewpoint of safety, fire prevention, and sanitation, give permission for the construction of those buildings, specifying a period of use of not more than one year (or a period deemed necessary by the Designated Administrative Agency for the construction concerned, with respect to temporary stores or other temporary buildings necessary for taking the place of the old buildings during the period of construction work). In this case, the provisions of Article 12, paragraphs (1) through (4), Articles 21 through 27; Article 31, Article 34, paragraph (2), Article 35-2, Article 35-3 and Article 37, and the provisions of Chapter III shall not apply.
６　特定行政庁は、国際的な規模の会議又は競技会の用に供することその他の理由により一年を超えて使用する特別の必要がある仮設興行場等について、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がなく、かつ、公益上やむを得ないと認める場合においては、前項の規定にかかわらず、当該仮設興行場等の使用上必要と認める期間を定めてその建築を許可することができる。この場合においては、同項後段の規定を準用する。
(6) The Designated Administrative Agency may grant permission for the construction of the temporary playhouse, etc. notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph, by specifying a period that is deemed necessary for use of the relevant temporary playhouse, etc., concerning a temporary playhouse, etc. of which use in excess of one year is necessary due to reasons such as providing a meeting place or for competitions of an international scale, when the Agency concludes that there are no objections from the viewpoint of safety, fire prevention and sanitation, and that it is permissible in light of the public interest. In this case, the provisions of the latter part of that paragraph shall apply mutatis mutandis.
７　特定行政庁は、前項の規定による許可をする場合においては、あらかじめ、建築審査会の同意を得なければならない。
(7) The Designated Administrative Agency must obtain consent thereto from the Building Review Council in advance, when granting permission under the preceding paragraph.
（景観重要建造物である建築物に対する制限の緩和）
(Relaxation of Restrictions on Buildings that are Buildings Important for landscape)
第八十五条の二　景観法第十九条第一項の規定により景観重要建造物として指定された建築物のうち、良好な景観の保全のためその位置又は構造をその状態において保存すべきものについては、市町村は、同法第二十二条及び第二十五条の規定の施行のため必要と認める場合においては、国土交通大臣の承認を得て、条例で、第二十一条から第二十五条まで、第二十八条、第四十三条、第四十四条、第四十七条、第五十二条、第五十三条、第五十四条から第五十六条の二まで、第五十八条、第六十一条、第六十二条、第六十七条第一項及び第五項から第七項まで並びに第六十八条第一項及び第二項の規定の全部若しくは一部を適用せず、又はこれらの規定による制限を緩和することができる。
Article 85-2  Concerning to regarded one worthy to be preserved in its current location and construction to conserve the good scenery, of buildings designated as Buildings important for landscape pursuant to the provisions of the Landscape Act, Article 19, paragraph (1), municipalities may provide in their ordinances, upon obtaining the approval of the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, that whole or part of the provisions referred to in Articles 21 through 25, Article 28, Article 43, Article 44, Article 47, Article 52, Article 53, Articles 54 through 56-2, Article 58, Article 61, Article 62, Article 67, paragraph (1) and paragraphs (5) through (7), and Article 68, paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) or that the restrictions under those provisions are to be relaxed, when those provisions is deemed necessary to enforce the provisions referred to in Article 22 and Article 25 of the same Act.
（伝統的建造物群保存地区内の制限の緩和）
(Relaxation of Restrictions in Traditional Building Preservation Zones)
第八十五条の三　文化財保護法第百四十三条第一項又は第二項の伝統的建造物群保存地区内においては、市町村は、同条第一項後段（同条第二項後段において準用する場合を含む。）の条例において定められた現状変更の規制及び保存のための措置を確保するため必要と認める場合においては、国土交通大臣の承認を得て、条例で、第二十一条から第二十五条まで、第二十八条、第四十三条、第四十四条、第五十二条、第五十三条、第五十五条、第五十六条、第六十一条、第六十二条及び第六十七条第一項の規定の全部若しくは一部を適用せず、又はこれらの規定による制限を緩和することができる。
Article 85-3  In traditional building preservation zones as specified in Article 143, paragraph (1) or (2) of the Cultural Properties Protection Act, municipalities may provide in their ordinances upon obtaining the approval of the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism that the whole or part of the provisions referred to in Articles 21 through 25, Article 28, Article 43, Article 44, Article 52, Article 53, Article 55, Article 56, Articles 61, Article 62 and Article 67 paragraph (1) are not applicable or that the restrictions based on those provisions are to be relaxed, when that provision is deemed necessary by the relevant municipalities for ensuring appropriate measures for the restraint of modification of the present state or for preservation as prescribed in ordinances under the latter part of paragraph (1) of Article 83-3 of the same Act (including cases where the part applies mutatis mutandis in the latter part of paragraph (2) of that Article.) .
（一の敷地とみなすこと等による制限の緩和）
(Special Rules for Specified Multiple Buildings)
第八十六条　建築物の敷地又は建築物の敷地以外の土地で二以上のものが一団地を形成している場合において、当該一団地（その内に第八項の規定により現に公告されている他の対象区域があるときは、当該他の対象区域の全部を含むものに限る。以下この項、第六項及び第七項において同じ。）内に建築される一又は二以上の構えを成す建築物（二以上の構えを成すものにあつては、総合的設計によつて建築されるものに限る。以下この項及び第三項において「一又は二以上の建築物」という。）のうち、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、特定行政庁が当該一又は二以上の建築物の位置及び構造が安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めるものに対する第二十三条、第四十三条、第五十二条第一項から第十四項まで、第五十三条第一項若しくは第二項、第五十四条第一項、第五十五条第二項、第五十六条第一項から第四項まで、第六項若しくは第七項、第五十六条の二第一項から第三項まで、第五十七条の二、第五十七条の三第一項から第四項まで、第五十九条第一項、第五十九条の二第一項、第六十条第一項、第六十条の二第一項、第六十条の二の二第一項、第六十条の三第一項、第六十一条又は第六十八条の三第一項から第三項までの規定（次項から第四項までにおいて「特例対象規定」という。）の適用については、当該一団地を当該一又は二以上の建築物の一の敷地とみなす。
Article 86  (1) If two or more buildings are constructed within one estate (when this estate includes another target area pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (8), the entire relevant other target areas must be included) by integral designing, those buildings shall be considered to be located on the same site in applying the provisions of Article 23, Article 43, Article 52, paragraphs (1) through (13), Article 52-2, Article 52-3, paragraphs (1) through (4), Article 53, paragraph (1) or (2), Article 54, paragraph (1), Article 55, paragraph (2), Article 56, paragraphs (1) through (4) or (6), Article 56-2, paragraphs (1) through (3), Article 59, paragraph (1), Article 59-2, paragraph (1), Article 60, paragraph (1), Article 60-2, paragraph (1), Article 60-2-2, paragraph (1), Article 60-3, paragraph (1), Article 61, or Article 68-3 paragraphs (1) through (3) (referred to in the next paragraph through paragraph (4) as "regulations subject to exemption") if the Designated Administrative Agency concludes, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, that the location and construction of each building presents no objection from the viewpoint of safety, fire prevention and sanitation.
２　一定の一団の土地の区域（その内に第八項の規定により現に公告されている他の対象区域があるときは、当該他の対象区域の全部を含むものに限る。以下この項及び第六項において同じ。）内に現に存する建築物の位置及び構造を前提として、安全上、防火上及び衛生上必要な国土交通省令で定める基準に従い総合的見地からした設計によつて当該区域内に建築物が建築される場合において、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、特定行政庁がその位置及び構造が安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認める当該区域内に存することとなる各建築物に対する特例対象規定の適用については、当該一定の一団の土地の区域をこれらの建築物の一の敷地とみなす。
(2) If, considering the locations and structures of buildings already constructed in an area of the land of a certain single estate (when this estate includes another target area pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (8), the entire relevant other target areas must be included), buildings are to be constructed on the relevant site based on the integral designing in accordance with requirements for safety, fire prevention, and sanitation as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, and so approved by the Designated Administrative Agency, the regulations subject to exemption shall be applied to the buildings on the relevant site as if these buildings were located on a single building site.
３　建築物の敷地又は建築物の敷地以外の土地で二以上のものが、政令で定める空地を有し、かつ、面積が政令で定める規模以上である一団地を形成している場合において、当該一団地（その内に第八項の規定により現に公告されている他の対象区域があるときは、当該他の対象区域の全部を含むものに限る。以下この項、第六項、第七項及び次条第八項において同じ。）内に建築される一又は二以上の建築物のうち、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、特定行政庁が、当該一又は二以上の建築物の位置及び建蔽率、容積率、各部分の高さその他の構造について、交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がなく、かつ、総合的な配慮がなされていることにより市街地の環境の整備改善に資すると認めて許可したものについては、特例対象規定（第五十九条の二第一項を除く。）の適用について、当該一団地を当該一又は二以上の建築物の一の敷地とみなすとともに、当該建築物の各部分の高さ又は容積率を、その許可の範囲内において、第五十五条第一項の規定又は当該一団地を一の敷地とみなして適用する第五十二条第一項から第九項まで、第五十六条若しくは第五十七条の二第六項の規定による限度を超えるものとすることができる。
(3) If two or more buildings are constructed within one estate with open space specified by Cabinet Order and with an area equal to or larger than a scale specified by Cabinet Order (when this estate includes another area subject to public notice pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (8), the entire other site must be included) by integral designing, and where with regards those buildings, the Designated Administrative Agency has, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, permitted as buildings of which location, building coverage ratio, floor area ratio, height of each part, and other structures will not be detrimental from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire prevention and sanitation, and as a result of overall consideration, will contribute to the improvement of the environment of the urban area, the regulations subject to exemption (excluding Article 59-2, paragraph (1)) shall be applied to the relevant permitted buildings as if they were on the same site, and, within the authorization of permission, it shall be possible for the floor area ratio of those buildings and for the height of each of their parts to exceed the limits under Article 52, paragraphs (1) through (8); Article 52-2, paragraph (6) or Article 56; or Article 55 paragraph (1) which are applied assuming these buildings are on the same site.
４　その面積が政令で定める規模以上である一定の一団の土地の区域（その内に第八項の規定により現に公告されている他の対象区域があるときは、当該他の対象区域の全部を含むものに限る。以下この項、第六項及び次条第八項において同じ。）内に現に存する建築物の位置及び建蔽率、容積率、各部分の高さその他の構造を前提として、安全上、防火上及び衛生上必要な国土交通省令で定める基準に従い総合的見地からした設計によつて当該区域内に建築物が建築され、かつ、当該区域内に政令で定める空地を有する場合において、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、特定行政庁が、その建築物の位置及び建蔽率、容積率、各部分の高さその他の構造について、交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がなく、かつ、総合的な配慮がなされていることにより市街地の環境の整備改善に資すると認めて許可したときは、当該区域内に存することとなる各建築物に対する特例対象規定（第五十九条の二第一項を除く。）の適用について、当該一定の一団の土地の区域をこれらの建築物の一の敷地とみなすとともに、建築される建築物の各部分の高さ又は容積率を、その許可の範囲内において、第五十五条第一項の規定又は当該一定の一団の土地の区域を一の敷地とみなして適用する第五十二条第一項から第九項まで、第五十六条若しくは第五十七条の二第六項の規定による限度を超えるものとすることができる。
(4) If, premised on the locations, building coverage ratios, floor area ratios, heights of each part and other structures of buildings which already exist in an area of the land of a certain single estate with an area equal to or larger than a scale specified by Cabinet Order (when this estate includes another area subject to public notice pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (8), the entire other site must be included) , buildings are constructed in the relevant area by integral designing based on the criteria specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order that are necessary for traffic, safety, fire prevention, and sanitation, and the relevant area contains open space specified by Cabinet Order, when the Designated Administrative Agency has, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, permitted the relevant new building as one of which location, building coverage ratio, floor area ratio, height of each part, and other structures will not be detrimental from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire prevention, and sanitation, and as a result of overall consideration, will contribute to the improvement of the environment of the urban area, the regulations subject to exemption (excluding Article 59-2, paragraph (1)) shall be applied to each of the buildings that now exist in the relevant area as if these buildings were on the same site, and, within the authorization of permission, it shall be possible for the floor area ratio of the new building and for the height of each of its parts to exceed the limits under Article 55; or Article 52, paragraphs (1) through (9), Article 56 or Article 57-2, paragraph (6) which are applied assuming these buildings are on the same site.
５　第四十四条第二項の規定は、前二項の規定による許可をする場合に準用する。
(5) The provision of Article 44, paragraph (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis in the case of the permissions under the preceding 2 paragraphs.
６　第一項から第四項までの規定による認定又は許可を申請しようとする者は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、対象区域（第一項若しくは第三項の一団地又は第二項若しくは第四項の一定の一団の土地の区域をいう。以下同じ。）内の建築物の位置及び構造に関する計画を策定して提出するとともに、その者以外に当該対象区域の内にある土地について所有権又は借地権を有する者があるときは、当該計画について、あらかじめ、これらの者の同意を得なければならない。
(6) A person applying for the approval or permission under paragraphs (1) through (4) must prepare and submit a plan concerning the locations and structures of the buildings on the specified site (one estate in paragraphs (1) or (3), or an area of the land of a certain single estate in paragraph (2) or (4); the same applies hereinafter), as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, and when there are other parties with property ownership rights or leasehold rights to land within the relevant specified site, the agreement of all these parties concerning the relevant plan must be obtained in advance.
７　第一項又は第三項の場合において、次に掲げる条件に該当する地区計画等（集落地区計画を除く。）の区域内の建築物については、一団地内に二以上の構えを成す建築物の総合的設計による建築を、工区を分けて行うことができる。
(7) With respect to buildings in District Plans areas, etc. (excluding Rural District Plans) coming under the following conditions in the case of paragraph (1) or (3), the construction of two or more buildings on one estate by integral designing can be done by dividing the buildings into execution phases:
一　地区整備計画等（集落地区整備計画を除く。）が定められている区域のうち、次に掲げる事項が定められている区域であること。
(i) an area for which District Development Plans, etc. (excluding Rural Hamlet District Improvement Plans) has been established and the following items have been specified;
イ　地区施設等の配置及び規模
(a) location and size of district facilities, etc.;
ロ　壁面の位置の制限（地区施設等に面する壁面の位置を制限するものを含むものに限る。）
(b) restrictions on the position of wall surfaces (limited to those including restrictions on the position of wall surfaces facing district facilities, etc.).
二　第六十八条の二第一項の規定に基づく条例で、前号ロに掲げる事項に関する制限が定められている区域であること。
(ii) areas for which restrictions concerned with items set forth in (b) of the preceding item have been specified by ordinances based upon the provisions of Article 68-2, paragraph (1).
８　特定行政庁は、第一項から第四項までの規定による認定又は許可をしたときは、遅滞なく、当該認定又は許可に係る第六項の計画に関して、対象区域その他国土交通省令で定める事項を公告するとともに、対象区域、建築物の位置その他国土交通省令で定める事項を表示した図書をその事務所に備えて、一般の縦覧に供さなければならない。
(8) When the Designated Administrative Agency has given approval or permission under paragraphs (1) through (4), it must immediately publicly notify of the relevant specified site and other items concerning the plan in paragraph (6) related to the relevant approval or permission as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, and must at the same time drawings and documents concerning the specified site, the locations of the buildings, and other items specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order to make them available for public inspection.
９　第一項から第四項までの規定による認定又は許可は、前項の規定による公告によつて、その効力を生ずる。
(9) An approval or permission under paragraphs (1) through (4) shall take effect by the public notice under the preceding paragraph.
１０　第八項の規定により公告された対象区域（以下「公告対象区域」という。）の全部を含む土地の区域内の建築物の位置及び構造について第一項から第四項までの規定による認定又は許可の申請があつた場合において、特定行政庁が当該申請に係る第一項若しくは第二項の規定による認定（以下この項において「新規認定」という。）又は第三項若しくは第四項の規定による許可（以下この項において「新規許可」という。）をしたときは、当該公告対象区域内の建築物の位置及び構造についての第一項若しくは第二項若しくは次条第一項の規定による従前の認定又は第三項若しくは第四項若しくは次条第二項若しくは第三項の規定による従前の許可は、新規認定又は新規許可に係る第八項の規定による公告があつた日から将来に向かつて、その効力を失う。
(10) When an application under paragraphs (1) through (4) for approval or permission of the locations and structures of the buildings on a site that includes the entire site in the target area publicly notified pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (8) (hereinafter referred to as "area subject to public notice") has been approved under paragraph (1) or (2) (hereinafter in this paragraph referred to as "new approval"), or permitted under paragraph (3) or (4) (hereinafter in this paragraph referred to as "new permission") by the Designated Administrative Agency, the prior approvals concerning locations and structures of the buildings on a relevant area subject to public notice under paragraph (1) or (2) or under paragraph (1) of the next Article, or the prior permission under paragraph (3) or (4), or under paragraph (2) or (3) of the next Article shall cease to be effective on and after the day of the public notice under paragraph (8) concerning the new approval or permission.
（公告認定対象区域内における一敷地内認定建築物以外の建築物の位置及び構造の認定等）
(Approval of the Location and Structure of a Building other than Approved Buildings on a Single Site within the Site Approved in the Public Notice)
第八十六条の二　公告認定対象区域（前条第一項又は第二項の規定による認定に係る公告対象区域をいう。以下同じ。）内において、同条第一項又は第二項の規定により一の敷地内にあるものとみなされる建築物（以下「一敷地内認定建築物」という。）以外の建築物を建築しようとする者は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、当該建築物の位置及び構造が当該公告認定対象区域内の他の一敷地内認定建築物の位置及び構造との関係において安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がない旨の特定行政庁の認定を受けなければならない。
Article 86-2  (1) A person which intends to construct a building other than buildings considered to be on a single site pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (1) or (2) of that Article (hereinafter referred to as "approved buildings on a single site") within the site approved in the public notice (referred to the area subject to public notice related to the approval under the provisions of paragraph (1) or (2) of the preceding Article; the same applies hereinafter), as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, must obtain the approval of the Designated Administrative Agency to the effect that the location and structure of the approved building on a single site presents no objection from the viewpoint of safety, fire prevention, or sanitation in relation to the locations and structures of the existing approved buildings on the same site within the site approved in the public notice concerned.
２　一敷地内認定建築物以外の建築物を、面積が政令で定める規模以上である公告認定対象区域内に建築しようとする場合（当該区域内に政令で定める空地を有することとなる場合に限る。）において、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、特定行政庁が、当該建築物の位置及び建蔽率、容積率、各部分の高さその他の構造について、他の一敷地内認定建築物の位置及び建蔽率、容積率、各部分の高さその他の構造との関係において、交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がなく、かつ、市街地の環境の整備改善に資すると認めて許可したときは、当該建築物の各部分の高さ又は容積率を、その許可の範囲内において、第五十五条第一項の規定又は当該公告認定対象区域を一の敷地とみなして適用される第五十二条第一項から第九項まで、第五十六条若しくは第五十七条の二第六項の規定による限度を超えるものとすることができる。この場合において、前項の規定は、適用しない。
(2) If a building other than approved buildings on a single site is to be constructed within the site approved in the public notice with an area equal to or larger than the scale specified by Cabinet Order (limited to those for which the relevant site includes open space specified by Cabinet Order), when the Designated Administrative Agency has, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, permitted after concluding that the location, building coverage ratio, floor area ratio, height and each part and other structures of the relevant building will not be detrimental from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire prevention, and sanitation and that will contribute to the improvement of the urban area in relation to the location, building coverage ratio, floor area ratio, height and each part and other structures of the other approved buildings on a single site, within the authorization of permission, it shall be possible for the heights and floor area ratios of each part of the relevant building to exceed the limits under Article 55, paragraph (1) and the provisions of Article 52, paragraphs (1) through (9), Article 56, or Article 57-2, paragraph (6) which are applied assuming that site approved in the public notice is a single site In this case, the provisions of the preceding paragraph shall not apply.
３　公告許可対象区域（前条第三項又は第四項の規定による許可に係る公告対象区域をいう。以下同じ。）内において、同条第三項又は第四項の規定により一の敷地内にあるものとみなされる建築物（以下「一敷地内許可建築物」という。）以外の建築物を建築しようとする者は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、特定行政庁の許可を受けなければならない。この場合において、特定行政庁は、当該建築物が、その位置及び建蔽率、容積率、各部分の高さその他の構造について、他の一敷地内許可建築物の位置及び建蔽率、容積率、各部分の高さその他の構造との関係において、交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がなく、かつ、市街地の環境の整備改善を阻害することがないと認めるとともに、当該区域内に同条第三項又は第四項の政令で定める空地を維持することとなると認める場合に限り、許可するものとする。
(3) A person which intends to construct a building other than buildings considered to be on a single site pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (3) or (4) of that Article (hereinafter referred to as "permitted buildings on a single site") within the site permitted in the public notice (referred to the area subject to public notice related to the permission under the provisions of paragraph (3) or (4) of the preceding Article; the same applies hereinafter) must obtain permission from the Designated Administrative Agency, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order. In this case, the Designated Administrative Agency shall give permission only in a case where it is concluded that the location, building coverage ratio, floor area ratio, height of each part and other structures of the relevant building will not be detrimental from the viewpoint of traffic, safety, fire prevention, and sanitation and that it will contribute to the improvement of the urban area in relation to the location, building coverage ratio, floor area ratio, height and each part and other structures of the other permitted buildings on a single site, and it is also concluded that the relevant site will maintain open space specified by Cabinet
４　第二項の規定による許可を申請しようとする者は、その者以外に公告認定対象区域内にある土地について所有権又は借地権を有する者があるときは、建築物に関する計画について、あらかじめ、これらの者の同意を得なければならない。
(4) A person that intends to apply for permission under paragraph (2) must obtain, in advance, the agreement of these parties concerning the plan for the building, when there are parties other than this person with ownership rights or leasehold rights to land within the site approved in the public notice.
５　第四十四条第二項の規定は、第二項又は第三項の規定による許可をする場合に準用する。
(5) The provision of Article 44, paragraph (2) shall apply mutatis mutandis in the case of the permission under paragraph (2) or (3).
６　特定行政庁は、第一項から第三項までの規定による認定又は許可をしたときは、遅滞なく、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、その旨を公告するとともに、前条第八項の図書の表示する事項について所要の変更をしなければならない。
(6) When the Designated Administrative Agency has given approval or permission under the provisions of paragraphs (1) through (3), as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, it must immediately give public notice to that effect to that effect, and must carry out specified changes to the items presented in the drawings and documents specified in paragraph (8) of the preceding Article.
７　前条第九項の規定は、第一項から第三項までの規定による認定又は許可について準用する。
(7) The provisions of paragraph (9) of the preceding Article shall apply mutatis mutandis in the case of an approval or permission under paragraphs (1) through (3).
８　公告対象区域内の第一項の規定による認定又は第二項若しくは第三項の規定による許可を受けた建築物及び当該建築物以外の当該公告対象区域内の建築物については、それぞれ、前条第一項若しくは第二項の規定又は同条第三項若しくは第四項（第二項の規定による許可に係るものにあつては、同条第三項又は第四項中一団地又は一定の一団の土地の区域を一の敷地とみなす部分に限る。）の規定を準用する。
(8) The provisions of paragraph (1) or (2) of the preceding Article or the provisions of paragraph (3) or (4) of that Article (in the case of the permission under paragraph (2), limited to parts of paragraph (3) or (4) of that Article which treat one estate or an area of the land of a certain single estate as a single site) shall apply mutatis mutandis to a building within an area subject to public notice that has received approval under paragraph (1) or permission under the provisions of paragraph (2) or (3) and to a building on the area subject to public notice concerned other than the relevant building respectively.
９　公告認定対象区域内に第一項の規定による認定を受けた建築物がある場合における同項又は第二項の規定の適用については、当該建築物を一敷地内認定建築物とみなす。
(9) The provisions of paragraph (1) if there is a building which has received approval under the provisions referred to in that paragraph or paragraph (2) within the site approved in the public notice, shall be applied assuming that the relevant building is an approved building on a single site.
１０　第二項の規定による許可に係る第六項の公告があつた公告認定対象区域は、その日以後は、公告許可対象区域とみなす。
(10) A site approved in the public notice for which there has been a public notice under the provisions of paragraph (6) concerning the permission under paragraph (2), shall be considered to be a site permitted in the public notice from the day of the relevant public notice.
１１　前項に規定する公告許可対象区域内における第三項の規定の適用については、第二項の規定による許可を受けた建築物及び当該建築物以外の当該公告許可対象区域内の建築物を一敷地内許可建築物とみなす。
(11) The provisions referred to in paragraph (3) shall be applied on a site permitted in the public notice under the provisions of the preceding paragraph, assuming that the building which has received permission under paragraph (2) and a building on the site permitted in the public notice concerned other than the relevant building is permitted buildings on a single site.
１２　公告許可対象区域内に第三項の規定による許可を受けた建築物がある場合における同項の規定の適用については、当該建築物を一敷地内許可建築物とみなす。
(12) The provisions of paragraph (3) if there is a building which has received permission referred to in that paragraph within the site permitted in the public notice, shall be applied assuming that the relevant building is a permitted building on a single site.
（一の敷地内にあるとみなされる建築物に対する高度利用地区等内における制限の特例）
(Special Rules for Restrictions on Buildings Considered to be on a Single Site in High-level Use District)
第八十六条の三　第八十六条第一項から第四項まで（これらの規定を前条第八項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定により一の敷地内にあるものとみなされる建築物は、第五十九条第一項、第六十条の二第一項又は第六十条の三第一項の規定を適用する場合においては、これを一の建築物とみなす。
Article 86-3  Buildings considered to be on a single site pursuant to the provisions of Article 86, paragraphs (1) through (4) (including cases where these provisions apply mutatis mutandis in paragraph (8) of the preceding Article) shall be treated as a single building when the provisions of Article 59, paragraph (1) or Article 60-2, paragraph (1) or Article 60-3, paragraph (1) are applied.
（一の敷地内にあるとみなされる建築物に対する外壁の開口部に対する制限の特例）
(Special Rules for Buildings Considered to be on a Single Site concerning Openings in Exterior Walls)
第八十六条の四　次の各号のいずれかに該当する建築物について第二十七条第二項若しくは第三項又は第六十七条第一項の規定を適用する場合においては、第一号イに該当する建築物は耐火建築物と、同号ロに該当する建築物は準耐火建築物とみなす。
Article 86-4  When Article 27, paragraph (2) or (3), or Article 67, paragraph (1) applies to a building coming under any of the following items, a building under item (i), (a) shall be considered to be a fire-resistive building and a building under item (i), (b) shall be considered to be a quasi fire-resistive building:
一　第八十六条第一項又は第三項の規定による認定又は許可を受けて建築する建築物で、次のいずれかに該当するもの
(i) buildings approved or permitted under Article 86, paragraph (1) or paragraph (3) and coming under any of the following;
イ　第二条第九号の二イに該当するもの
(a) those which come under Article 2, item (ix)-2, (a);
ロ　第二条第九号の三イ又はロのいずれかに該当するもの
(b) those which come under either (a) or (b) in Article 2, item (ix)-3.
二　第八十六条第二項又は第四項の規定による認定又は許可を受けて建築する建築物で、前号イ又はロのいずれかに該当するもの（当該認定又は許可に係る公告対象区域内に現に存する建築物が、同号イ又はロのいずれかに該当するものである場合に限る。）
(ii) buildings approved or permitted under Article 86, paragraph (2) or paragraph (4), and which come under either (a) or (b) in the preceding item (limited to those for which the existing buildings on the area subject to public notice related to the approval or permission concerned come under either (a) or (b) in that item);
三　第八十六条の二第一項から第三項までの規定による認定又は許可を受けて建築する建築物で、第一号イ又はロのいずれかに該当するもの（当該認定又は許可に係る公告対象区域内の他の一敷地内認定建築物又は一敷地内許可建築物が、同号イ又はロのいずれかに該当するものである場合に限る。）
(iii) buildings approved or permitted under Article 86-2, paragraphs (1) through (3), and which come under either (a) or (b) in item (i) (limited to those for which other approved buildings on a single site or permitted buildings on a single site within the area subject to public notice related to the approval or permission concerned come under either (a) or (b) in that item).
（一の敷地とみなすこと等の認定又は許可の取消し）
(Cancellation of the Approval or Permission of Specified Multiple Buildings)
第八十六条の五　公告対象区域内の土地について所有権又は借地権を有する者は、その全員の合意により、当該公告対象区域内の建築物に係る第八十六条第一項若しくは第二項若しくは第八十六条の二第一項の規定による認定又は第八十六条第三項若しくは第四項若しくは第八十六条の二第二項若しくは第三項の規定による許可の取消しを特定行政庁に申請することができる。
Article 86-5  (1) Parties with property ownership rights or lease-hold rights to land on the area subject to public notice shall, with the unanimous agreement of all parties, be able to submit a request for cancellation of the approval under Article 86, paragraph (1) or (2); or Article 86-2, paragraph (1); or a request for cancellation of the permission under Article 86, paragraph (3) or (4); or Article 86-2, paragraph (2) or (3) to the Designated Administrative Agency.
２　前項の規定による認定の取消しの申請を受けた特定行政庁は、当該申請に係る公告認定対象区域内の建築物の位置及び構造が安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めるときは、当該申請に係る認定を取り消すものとする。
(2) If a Designated Administrative Agency which has received an application for cancellation of the approval under the preceding paragraph, finds that the location and structure of buildings on the site permitted in the public notice for the relevant application is not detrimental for safety, fire prevention, and sanitation, it cancels the approval concerning the relevant application.
３　第一項の規定による許可の取消しの申請を受けた特定行政庁は、当該申請に係る公告許可対象区域内の建築物の位置及び建蔽率、容積率、各部分の高さその他の構造について、交通上、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がなく、かつ、市街地の環境の整備改善を阻害することがないと認めるときは、当該申請に係る許可を取り消すものとする。
(3) If a Designated Administrative Agency which has received an application for cancellation of the permission under paragraph (1), finds that the location, building coverage ratio, floor area ratio, height of each part, and other structures of buildings on the site permitted in the public notice for the relevant application are not detrimental for safety, fire prevention, and sanitation, and does not obstruct the improvement of the environment of the urban area, it cancels the permission concerning the relevant application.
４　特定行政庁は、前二項の規定による取消しをしたときは、遅滞なく、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、その旨を公告しなければならない。
(4) When a Designated Administrative Agency has made a cancellation under the preceding two paragraphs, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order, it must immediately issue a public notice to that effect.
５　第二項又は第三項の規定による取消しは、前項の規定による公告によつて、その効力を生ずる。
(5) The cancellation under paragraph (2) or (3) shall take effect at the time of the public notice under the preceding paragraph.
６　前二項に定めるもののほか、第二項又は第三項の規定による認定又は許可の取消しについて必要な事項は、国土交通省令で定める。
(6) In addition to the provisions of the preceding two paragraphs, items necessary for the cancellation of the approval or permission under paragraph (2) or (3) shall be specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（総合的設計による一団地の住宅施設についての制限の特例）
(Special Rules for Restrictions on Residential Facilities on One Estate by Integral Designing)
第八十六条の六　一団地の住宅施設に関する都市計画を定める場合においては、第一種低層住居専用地域、第二種低層住居専用地域又は田園住居地域については、第五十二条第一項第一号に規定する容積率、第五十三条第一項第一号に規定する建蔽率、第五十四条第二項に規定する外壁の後退距離及び第五十五条第一項に規定する建築物の高さと異なる容積率、建蔽率、距離及び高さの基準を定めることができる。
Article 86-6  (1) When specifying the City Planning for residential facilities on one estate, with respect to the floor area ratio specified in Article 52, paragraph (1), item (i), the building coverage ratio specified in Article 53, paragraph (1), item (i), the retrocessive distance of exterior walls specified in Article 54, paragraph (2) and the height of buildings specified in Article 55, paragraph (1), criteria for the ratio, distance and height other than those specified in each relevant provision may be specified for Category 1 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Category 2 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts or Countryside Residential Districts.
２　前項の都市計画に基づき建築物を総合的設計によつて建築する場合において、当該建築物が同項の規定により当該都市計画に定められた基準に適合しており、かつ、特定行政庁がその各建築物の位置及び構造が当該第一種低層住居専用地域、第二種低層住居専用地域又は田園住居地域内の住居の環境の保護に支障がないと認めるときは、当該建築物については、第五十二条第一項第一号、第五十三条第一項第一号、第五十四条第一項及び第五十五条第一項の規定は、適用しない。
(2) If buildings are constructed by comprehensive designing based on the city planning in the preceding paragraph, if the relevant buildings conform to the criteria specified in the relevant city planning pursuant to e preceding paragraph, and if the Designated Administrative Agency finds that the location and structure of each building is not detrimental for protection of the residential environment in the Category 1 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Category 2 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, or Countryside Residential Districts, the provisions of Article 52, paragraph (1), item (i); Article 53, paragraph (1), item (i); Article 54, paragraph (1); and Article 55, paragraph (1) shall not apply to those buildings.
（既存の建築物に対する制限の緩和）
(Relaxation of Restrictions on Existing Buildings)
第八十六条の七　第三条第二項（第八十六条の九第一項において準用する場合を含む。以下この条、次条、第八十七条及び第八十七条の二において同じ。）の規定により第二十条、第二十六条、第二十七条、第二十八条の二（同条各号に掲げる基準のうち政令で定めるものに係る部分に限る。）、第三十条、第三十四条第二項、第四十七条、第四十八条第一項から第十四項まで、第五十一条、第五十二条第一項、第二項若しくは第七項、第五十三条第一項若しくは第二項、第五十四条第一項、第五十五条第一項、第五十六条第一項、第五十六条の二第一項、第五十七条の四第一項、第五十七条の五第一項、第五十八条、第五十九条第一項若しくは第二項、第六十条第一項若しくは第二項、第六十条の二第一項若しくは第二項、第六十条の二の二第一項から第三項まで、第六十条の三第一項若しくは第二項、第六十一条、第六十七条第一項若しくは第五項から第七項まで又は第六十八条第一項若しくは第二項の規定の適用を受けない建築物について政令で定める範囲内において増築、改築、大規模の修繕又は大規模の模様替（以下この条及び次条において「増築等」という。）をする場合（第三条第二項の規定により第二十条の規定の適用を受けない建築物について当該政令で定める範囲内において増築又は改築をする場合にあつては、当該増築又は改築後の建築物の構造方法が政令で定める基準に適合する場合に限る。）においては、第三条第三項第三号及び第四号の規定にかかわらず、これらの規定は、適用しない。
Article 86-7  (1) If addition, rebuilding, major repair or major remodeling (below in this Article and the next Article, "addition etc.") (limited to cases in which the structural method in the building after the additions or rebuilding conforms to the standards specified by Cabinet Order in the case of additions or rebuilding within the scope specified by the relevant Cabinet Order in buildings to which the provisions of Article 20 do not apply under the provisions of Article 3, paragraph (2)) is undertaken within the scope specified by Cabinet Order as to those buildings which, pursuant to the provisions of Article 3, paragraph (2) (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 86-9, paragraph (1); same shall apply below in this Article, in the next Article, in Article 87 and in Article 87-2), are not subject to the provisions referred to in Article 20, Article 26, Article 27, Article 28-2 (limited to parts of standards referred to in each item of that Article concerning provisions specified by Cabinet Order) Article 30, Article 34 paragraph (2), Article 47, Article 48, paragraphs (1) through (13), Article 51, Article 52, paragraphs (1) and (2) or Article 7, Article 53, paragraph (1) or paragraph (2), Article 54, paragraph (1), Article 55, paragraph (1), Article 56, paragraph (1), Article 56-2, paragraph (1), Article 57-4, paragraph (1), Article 57-5, paragraph (1), Article 58, Article 59, paragraph (1) or (2), Article 60, paragraph (1) or (2), Article 60-2, paragraph (1) or (2), Article 60-2, paragraph (1) or (2), Article 60-2-2, paragraphs (1) through (3), Article 60-3, paragraph (1) or 2, Article 61, Article 67, paragraph (1) or paragraphs (5) through (7) or Article 68, paragraph (1) or (2), those provisions shall not apply notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3, paragraph (3), items (iii) and (iv).
２　第三条第二項の規定により第二十条又は第三十五条（同条の技術的基準のうち政令で定めるものに係る部分に限る。以下この項及び第八十七条第四項において同じ。）の規定の適用を受けない建築物であつて、第二十条又は第三十五条に規定する基準の適用上一の建築物であつても別の建築物とみなすことができる部分として政令で定める部分（以下この項において「独立部分」という。）が二以上あるものについて増築等をする場合においては、第三条第三項第三号及び第四号の規定にかかわらず、当該増築等をする独立部分以外の独立部分に対しては、これらの規定は、適用しない。
(2) If, in a building not subject to the provisions referred to in Article 20 or Article 35 (limited to parts of the technical standards of that Article specified by Cabinet Order; same shall apply below in this paragraph and in Article 87 paragraph (4)) pursuant to the provisions of Article 3, paragraph (2), addition, etc. of two or parts specified by Cabinet Order as parts that can be regarded as separate buildings even when they are a single building under the application of the standards provided by Article 20 or Article 35 (below in this paragraph, called "independent parts") is undertaken, notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3, paragraph (3), items (iii) and (iv), these provisions shall not apply to independent parts other than independent parts concerning the addition, etc.
３　第三条第二項の規定により第二十八条、第二十八条の二（同条各号に掲げる基準のうち政令で定めるものに係る部分に限る。）、第二十九条から第三十二条まで、第三十四条第一項、第三十五条の三又は第三十六条（防火壁、防火床、防火区画、消火設備及び避雷設備の設置及び構造に係る部分を除く。）の規定の適用を受けない建築物について増築等をする場合においては、第三条第三項第三号及び第四号の規定にかかわらず、当該増築等をする部分以外の部分に対しては、これらの規定は、適用しない。
(3) In the case of the addition etc. of a building not covered by the provisions referred to in Article 28, Article 28-2 (limited to parts of criteria set forth in each item of that Article specified by Cabinet Order) Articles 29 through 32, Article 34, paragraph (1), Article 35-3 or Article 36 (excluding parts related to the locations and construction of fire walls, fire floors, fire separations, fire extinguishing equipment, and lightning conductors) pursuant to the provisions of Article 3, paragraph (2), notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3, paragraph (3), items (iii) and (iv), these provisions shall not apply to parts other than parts concerning the relevant addition etc.
４　第三条第二項の規定により建築基準法令の規定の適用を受けない建築物について政令で定める範囲内において移転をする場合においては、同条第三項第三号及び第四号の規定にかかわらず、建築基準法令の規定は、適用しない。
(4) In the case of a building to which the provisions referred to in building standard laws and regulations do not apply pursuant to the provisions of Article 3, paragraph (2), the provisions of building standard laws and regulations shall not apply to the relocation of a building within the scope specified by Cabinet Order, notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (3), items (iii) and (iv) of that Article.
（既存の一の建築物について二以上の工事に分けて増築等を含む工事を行う場合の制限の緩和）
(Relaxation of Restrictions in the Case of Work Performed Divided into Two or More Works including addition on an Existing Single Building)
第八十六条の八　第三条第二項の規定によりこの法律又はこれに基づく命令若しくは条例の規定の適用を受けない一の建築物について二以上の工事に分けて増築等を含む工事を行う場合において、特定行政庁が当該二以上の工事の全体計画が次に掲げる基準に適合すると認めたときにおける同項及び同条第三項の規定の適用については、同条第二項中「建築、修繕若しくは模様替の工事中の」とあるのは「第八十六条の八第一項の認定を受けた全体計画に係る二以上の工事の工事中若しくはこれらの工事の間の」と、同条第三項中「適用しない」とあるのは「適用しない。ただし、第三号又は第四号に該当するものにあつては、第八十六条の八第一項の認定を受けた全体計画に係る二以上の工事のうち最後の工事に着手するまでは、この限りでない」と、同項第三号中「工事」とあるのは「最初の工事」と、「増築、改築、移転、大規模の修繕又は大規模の模様替」とあるのは「第八十六条の八第一項の認定を受けた全体計画に係る二以上の工事」とする。
Article 86-8  (1) In a case where work including addition, etc. is performed divided into two or more works on a building not subject to provisions referred to in this Act, or orders or ordinances based thereon pursuant to the provisions of Article 3, paragraph (2), when the provisions of that paragraph and of paragraph (3) of that Article are applied after the Designated Administrative Agency has concluded that the overall plan for the relevant two or more works complies with the following criteria, the words "among construction, repair, or remodeling work" in paragraph (2) of that Article shall be reread as "within the two or more works or between these works in the overall plans that have received approval under Article 86-8, paragraph (1)" and "shall not apply" in paragraph (3) of that Article shall be reread as "shall not apply, Provided, however, that this shall not apply until the final work among the two or more works in the overall plan approved under Article 86-8, paragraph (1) in a case covered by item (iii) or (iv) is begun" and "work" in item (iii) of that paragraph shall be reread as "initial work", and "addition, rebuilding, relocation, large scale repair and large scale remodeling", shall be reread as "two or more works in the overall plan approved under Article 86-8, paragraph (1)".
一　一の建築物の増築等を含む工事を二以上の工事に分けて行うことが当該建築物の利用状況その他の事情によりやむを得ないものであること。
(i) performing works including addition, etc. of a single building divided into two or more works shall be unavoidable considering the way the building is used and other circumstances;
二　全体計画に係る全ての工事の完了後において、当該全体計画に係る建築物及び建築物の敷地が建築基準法令の規定に適合することとなること。
(ii) after all works relating the overall plan have been completed, the building and the site of the building related to the relevant overall plan shall comply with the provisions of building standard laws and regulations;
三　全体計画に係るいずれの工事の完了後においても、当該全体計画に係る建築物及び建築物の敷地について、交通上の支障、安全上、防火上及び避難上の危険性並びに衛生上及び市街地の環境の保全上の有害性が増大しないものであること。
(iii) when all the works in the overall plan have been completed, the building and the building site in the relevant overall plan shall not obstruct traffic, be detrimental to safety, fire safety, safe evacuation, and sanitation, nor shall they increase the risk to the urban environment.
２　前項の認定の申請の手続その他当該認定に関し必要な事項は、国土交通省令で定める。
(2) Procedures for requesting the approval in the preceding paragraph and other items necessary for the relevant approval shall be specified by the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism.
３　第一項の認定を受けた全体計画に係る工事の建築主（以下この条において「認定建築主」という。）は、当該認定を受けた全体計画の変更（国土交通省令で定める軽微な変更を除く。）をしようとするときは、特定行政庁の認定を受けなければならない。前二項の規定は、この場合に準用する。
(3) When a building owner that has obtained approval for work in an overall plan in paragraph (1) (below in this Article "approved building owner"), intends to revise the relevant approved overall plan (excluding minor revision specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order) the relevant building owner must obtain approval of the Designated Administrative Agency. The provisions of the proceeding two paragraphs shall apply mutatis mutandis to this case.
４　特定行政庁は、認定建築主に対し、第一項の認定を受けた全体計画（前項の規定による変更の認定があつたときは、その変更後のもの。次項において同じ。）に係る工事の状況について報告を求めることができる。
(4) The Designated Administrative Agency may request that the approved building owner submit a report on the state of the work in the overall plan that has received the approval in paragraph (1) (when a revision under the preceding paragraph has been obtained, after this revision; the same shall apply in the next paragraph).
５　特定行政庁は、認定建築主が第一項の認定を受けた全体計画に従つて工事を行つていないと認めるときは、当該認定建築主に対し、相当の猶予期限を付けて、その改善に必要な措置をとるべきことを命ずることができる。
(5) If the Designated Administrative Agency finds that the approved building owner has not performed the work in conformity with the overall plan that has received the approval in paragraph (1), it may order the relevant approved building owner to take measures necessary to improve the work within a suitable period of grace.
６　特定行政庁は、認定建築主が前項の命令に違反したときは、第一項又は第三項の認定を取り消すことができる。
(6) The Designated Administrative Agency shall, when the approved building owner has failed to obey the order in the preceding paragraph, be able to cancel the approval under paragraph (1) or (3).
（公共事業の施行等による敷地面積の減少についての第三条等の規定の準用）
(Application of the Provisions referred to in Article 3 to the Reduction of Building Site Area based on Execution of a Public Project)
第八十六条の九　第三条第二項及び第三項（第一号及び第二号を除く。）の規定は、次に掲げる事業の施行の際現に存する建築物若しくはその敷地又は現に建築、修繕若しくは模様替の工事中の建築物若しくはその敷地が、当該事業の施行によるこれらの建築物の敷地面積の減少により、この法律若しくはこれに基づく命令若しくは条例の規定に適合しないこととなつた場合又はこれらの規定に適合しない部分を有するに至つた場合について準用する。この場合において、同項第三号中「この法律又はこれに基づく命令若しくは条例の規定の施行又は適用」とあるのは、「第八十六条の九第一項各号に掲げる事業の施行による建築物の敷地面積の減少」と読み替えるものとする。
Article 86-9  (1) The provisions of Article 3, paragraphs (2) and (3) (excluding items (i) and (ii)) shall apply mutatis mutandis, in a case where, when the following project is executed, an existing building or its building site, or a building or its building site that is already being rebuilt, being repaired, or being remodeled no longer complies with the provisions of this Act, or orders or ordinances based thereon, or a part of these relevant building no longer complies with these provisions, because of the reduction in site area of the building as a result of the execution of the project. In this case, the words, "enforcement or application of the provisions referred to in this Act, or orders or ordinances based thereon" in item (iii) of that paragraph shall be reread as, "reduction in site area of a building as a result of the execution of a project set forth in each item in Article 86-9, paragraph (1)."
一　土地収用法第三条各号に掲げるものに関する事業若しくは都市計画法の規定により土地を収用し、若しくは使用することができる都市計画事業又はこれらの事業に係る土地収用法第十六条に規定する関連事業
(i) projects related to those set forth in each item of Article 3 of the Expropriation of Land Act, City Planning Projects that can expropriate or occupy lands pursuant to the provisions of the City Planning Act, or Related Projects under the provisions of Article 16 of the Expropriation of Land Act concerning these projects;
二　その他前号の事業に準ずる事業で政令で定めるもの
(ii) other projects similar to projects in the preceding item that are specified by Cabinet Order.
２　第五十三条の二第三項（第五十七条の五第三項、第六十七条第四項及び第六十八条第四項において準用する場合を含む。以下この項において同じ。）の規定は、前項各号に掲げる事業の施行による面積の減少により、当該事業の施行の際現に建築物の敷地として使用されている土地で第五十三条の二第一項（第五十七条の五第三項において準用する場合を含む。）、第六十七条第三項若しくは第六十八条第三項の規定に適合しなくなるもの又は当該事業の施行の際現に存する所有権その他の権利に基づいて建築物の敷地として使用するならばこれらの規定に適合しないこととなる土地について準用する。この場合において、第五十三条の二第三項中「同項の規定は」とあるのは「第一項、第六十七条第三項又は第六十八条第三項の規定は」と、同項第一号中「第一項の都市計画における建築物の敷地面積の最低限度が変更された際、」とあるのは「第八十六条の九第一項各号に掲げる事業の施行により面積が減少した際、当該面積の減少がなくとも」と、「従前の制限」とあるのは「制限」と、同項第二号中「第一項」とあるのは「第一項（第五十七条の五第三項において準用する場合を含む。）、第六十七条第三項若しくは第六十八条第三項」と、「同項」とあるのは「これら」と読み替えるものとする。
(2) The provisions of Article 53-2, paragraph (3) (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 57-5, paragraph (3), Article 67, paragraph (4), and Article 68, paragraph (4); the same shall apply below in this paragraph) shall apply mutatis mutandis to land, if the land already used as the site of a building, because of reduction in site area of a building as a result of execution of a project, no longer complies with the provisions of Article 53-2, paragraph (1) (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 57-5, paragraph (3)), Article 67, paragraph (3) or Article 68, paragraph (3), or in cases where the land no longer complies with these provisions if it is used as the site of a building under ownership rights or other rights existing at the time of the execution of the relevant project. In this case, the term "provisions of that paragraph" in Article 53-2, paragraph (3) shall be replaced with "provisions of paragraph (1), Article 67, paragraph (3) or Article 68, paragraph (3)"; and the words, "when the minimum site area of a building in city planning in paragraph (1) has been revised" in item (i) of that paragraph shall be replaced with "even if the relevant site area is reduced when the area has been reduced by the execution of a project set forth in each item of Article 86-9, paragraph (1)"; and the term "proceeding restriction" shall be replaced with "restriction"; and the term "paragraph (1)" in item (ii) of that paragraph shall be replaced with "paragraph (1) (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 57-5, paragraph (3)) Article 67-3, paragraph (3) or Article 68, paragraph (3)"; and the words "that paragraph" shall be replaced with "these paragraphs".
（用途の変更に対するこの法律の準用）
(Mutatis Mutandis Application of This Act to Alteration of Use)
第八十七条　建築物の用途を変更して第六条第一項第一号の特殊建築物のいずれかとする場合（当該用途の変更が政令で指定する類似の用途相互間におけるものである場合を除く。）においては、同条（第三項、第五項及び第六項を除く。）、第六条の二（第三項を除く。）、第六条の四（第一項第一号及び第二号の建築物に係る部分に限る。）、第七条第一項並びに第十八条第一項から第三項まで及び第十四項から第十六項までの規定を準用する。この場合において、第七条第一項中「建築主事の検査を申請しなければならない」とあるのは、「建築主事に届け出なければならない」と読み替えるものとする。
Article 87  (1) When the use of a building is altered as to special building as mentioned in Article 6, paragraph (1), item (i) (excluding cases where the relevant alteration of use is between similar uses as designated by Cabinet Order), the provisions of that Article (excluding paragraph (3), (5), and (6)), Article 6-2 (excluding paragraph (3)), Article 6-4 (limited to parts concerning buildings in paragraph (1), items (i) and (ii)), Article 7, paragraph (1), and Article 18, paragraphs (1) through (3) and paragraphs (14) through (16) shall apply mutatis mutandis. In this case, the term "must apply for an inspection by the building official" in Article 7, paragraph (1) shall be replaced with "must submit a notice to the building official."
２　建築物（次項の建築物を除く。）の用途を変更する場合においては、第四十八条第一項から第十四項まで、第五十一条、第六十条の二第三項及び第六十八条の三第七項の規定並びに第三十九条第二項、第四十条、第四十三条第三項、第四十三条の二、第四十九条から第五十条まで、第六十条の二の二第四項、第六十条の三第三項、第六十八条の二第一項及び第五項並びに第六十八条の九第一項の規定に基づく条例の規定を準用する。
(2) When the use of a building (excluding buildings as specified in the following paragraph) is altered, the provisions of Article 48, paragraphs (1) through (13), Article 51, Article 60-2, paragraph (3) and Article 68-3, paragraph (7) and the provisions of ordinances based on the provisions of Article 39, paragraph (2), Article 40, Article 43, paragraph (3), Article 43-2, Article 49 though Article 50, Article 60-2-2, paragraph (4), Article 60-3, paragraph (3), Article 68-2, paragraphs (1) and (5), and Article 68-9, paragraph (1) shall apply mutatis mutandis.
３　第三条第二項の規定により第二十七条、第二十八条第一項若しくは第三項、第二十九条、第三十条、第三十五条から第三十五条の三まで、第三十六条中第二十八条第一項若しくは第三十五条に関する部分、第四十八条第一項から第十四項まで若しくは第五十一条の規定又は第三十九条第二項、第四十条、第四十三条第三項、第四十三条の二、第四十九条から第五十条まで、第六十八条の二第一項若しくは第六十八条の九第一項の規定に基づく条例の規定（次条第一項において「第二十七条等の規定」という。）の適用を受けない建築物の用途を変更する場合においては、次の各号のいずれかに該当する場合を除き、これらの規定を準用する。
(3) If the use of a building is altered as to those buildings which, pursuant to the provisions of Article 3, paragraph (2), are not subject to the provisions of Article 27, Article 28, paragraph (1) or 3, Article 29, Article 30, Articles 35 through 35-3, parts of Article 36 which pertain to Article 28, paragraph (1) or Article 35, Article 48, paragraphs (1) through (13) or Article 51, or not subject to the provisions of ordinances based on the provisions (referred to in paragraph (1) of the following Article as "Provision of Article 27, etc.") of Article 39, paragraph (2), Article 40, Article 43, paragraph (3), Article 43-2, Articles 49 through 50, Article 68-2, paragraph (1) or Article 68-9, paragraph (1), those provisions shall apply mutatis mutandis except in cases coming under any of the following items:
一　増築、改築、大規模の修繕又は大規模の模様替をする場合
(i) where addition, rebuilding, major repair or major remodeling is executed;
二　当該用途の変更が政令で指定する類似の用途相互間におけるものであつて、かつ、建築物の修繕若しくは模様替をしない場合又はその修繕若しくは模様替が大規模でない場合
(ii) where the alteration of use is between similar uses as designated by Cabinet Order and not requiring any repair or remodeling of the building concerned or not requiring any major repair or remodeling thereof;
三　第四十八条第一項から第十四項までの規定に関しては、用途の変更が政令で定める範囲内である場合
(iii) where the alteration of use is within the scope specified by Cabinet Order, with respect to the application of the provisions of Article 48, paragraphs (1) through (13).
４　第八十六条の七第二項（第三十五条に係る部分に限る。）及び第八十六条の七第三項（第二十八条第一項若しくは第三項、第二十九条、第三十条、第三十五条の三又は第三十六条（居室の採光面積に係る部分に限る。以下この項において同じ。）に係る部分に限る。）の規定は、第三条第二項の規定により第二十八条第一項若しくは第三項、第二十九条、第三十条、第三十五条、第三十五条の三又は第三十六条の規定の適用を受けない建築物の用途を変更する場合について準用する。この場合において、第八十六条の七第二項及び第三項中「増築等」とあるのは「用途の変更」と、「第三条第三項第三号及び第四号」とあるのは「第八十七条第三項」と読み替えるものとする。
(4) The provisions of Article 86-7, paragraph (2) (limited to parts concerning Article 35) and Article 86-7, paragraph (3) (limited to parts concerning Article 28, paragraph (1) or (3), Article 29, Article 30, Article 35-3 or Article 36 (limited to parts concerning the natural lighted area of habitable rooms; same shall apply below in this paragraph)) shall apply mutatis mutandis to cases of the change in use of a building not subject to the provisions referred to in Article 28, paragraph (1) or (3), Article 29, Article 30, Article 35, Article 35-3 or Article 36 pursuant to the provisions of Article 3, paragraph (2). In this case, the term "addition etc." in Article 86-7, paragraphs (2) and (3) shall be replaced with "change in use"; and the term "Article 3, paragraph (3) items (iii) and (iv)" shall be replaced with "Article 87, paragraph (3)".
（既存の一の建築物について二以上の工事に分けて用途の変更に伴う工事を行う場合の制限の緩和）
(Relaxation of restrictions if construction work associated with a change of use is performed by dividing the work into two or more works on a single existing building)
第八十七条の二　第三条第二項の規定により第二十七条等の規定の適用を受けない一の建築物について二以上の工事に分けて用途の変更に伴う工事を行う場合（第八十六条の八第一項に規定する場合に該当する場合を除く。）において、特定行政庁が当該二以上の工事の全体計画が次に掲げる基準に適合すると認めたときにおける第三条第二項及び前条第三項の規定の適用については、第三条第二項中「建築、修繕若しくは模様替の工事中の」とあるのは「第八十七条の二第一項の認定を受けた全体計画に係る二以上の工事の工事中若しくはこれらの工事の間の」と、前条第三項中「準用する」とあるのは「準用する。ただし、次条第一項の認定を受けた全体計画に係る二以上の工事のうち最後の工事に着手するまでは、この限りでない」とする。
Article 87-2  (1) In the case where construction work associated with a change of designated use is performed by dividing the work into two or more works on a building to which the provisions referred to in Article 27, etc. do not apply pursuant to the provisions of Article 3, paragraph (2) (excluding cases that come under the cases specified in Article 86-8, paragraph (1)), concerning the application of the provisions referred to in Article 3, paragraphs (2) and (3) of the preceding Article when the Designated Administrative Agency has concluded that the overall plan for the relevant two or more works complies with the following criteria, the phrase of "under construction, repair or remodeling" in Article 3, paragraph (2) shall be read as "under construction of two or more works related to an overall plan that has been approved under Article 87-2, paragraph (1) or during these works", and the phrase "shall apply mutatis mutandis" in paragraph (3) of the preceding Article shall be read as "shall apply mutatis mutandis. Provided, however, this shall not apply until, of the two or more works related to the overall plan that has been approved under paragraph (1) of the next Article, the final work has begun":
一　一の建築物の用途の変更に伴う工事を二以上の工事に分けて行うことが当該建築物の利用状況その他の事情によりやむを得ないものであること。
(i) performing construction work that is associated with a change of use for one building by dividing it into two or more works shall be unavoidable, considering circumstances such as the purpose for which the building is used;
二　全体計画に係る全ての工事の完了後において、当該全体計画に係る建築物及び建築物の敷地が建築基準法令の規定に適合することとなること。
(ii) after completion of all the construction works related to the overall plan, the buildings and building sites related to the relevant overall plan shall conform to the provisions of building standard laws and regulations;
三　全体計画に係るいずれの工事の完了後においても、当該全体計画に係る建築物及び建築物の敷地について、交通上の支障、安全上、防火上及び避難上の危険性並びに衛生上及び市街地の環境の保全上の有害性が増大しないものであること。
(iii) even after completion of any of the construction works related to the overall plan, concerning the buildings and building sites related to the relevant overall plan, there shall be no increase in obstruction from the viewpoint of traffic, or in the danger from the viewpoint of safety, fire prevention or evacuation, and in the hazards from the viewpoint of sanitation and of the environmental conservation of the urban area.
２　第八十六条の八第二項から第六項までの規定は、前項の認定について準用する。
(2) The provisions of Article 86-8, paragraphs (2) through (6) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the approval under the preceding paragraph.
（建築物の用途を変更して一時的に他の用途の建築物として使用する場合の制限の緩和）
(Relaxation of restrictions if the use of a building is changed, and the building is used temporarily as a building for any other purpose)
第八十七条の三　非常災害があつた場合において、非常災害区域等内にある建築物の用途を変更して災害救助用建築物（住宅、病院その他これらに類する建築物で、国、地方公共団体又は日本赤十字社が災害救助のために使用するものをいう。第三項及び第百一条第一項第十六号において同じ。）として使用するとき（その災害が発生した日から一月以内に当該用途の変更に着手するときに限る。）における当該災害救助用建築物については、建築基準法令の規定は、適用しない。ただし、非常災害区域等のうち防火地域内にある建築物については、この限りでない。
Article 87-3  (1) In the case of a serious disaster, when using a building located in a serious disaster area, etc. after receiving approval to change its designated use to that of a building for disaster rescue (which means a house, hospital or any other building similar thereto that is used for disaster rescue by the State, a local government or the Japan Red Cross Society; the same shall apply in paragraph (3) and Article 101, paragraph (1), item (xvi)) (limited to those for which the relevant change of use is started within one month from the date of occurrence of the relevant disaster), the provisions of building standard laws and regulations shall not apply to the relevant building for disaster rescue. Provided, however, this shall not apply to buildings located in Fire Prevention Districts in a serious disaster area, etc.
２　災害があつた場合において、建築物の用途を変更して公益的建築物（学校、集会場その他これらに類する公益上必要な用途に供する建築物をいう。次項及び第百一条第一項第十六号において同じ。）として使用するときにおける当該公益的建築物については、第十二条第一項から第四項まで、第二十一条、第二十二条、第二十六条、第三十条、第三十四条第二項、第三十五条、第三十六条（第二十一条、第二十六条、第三十四条第二項及び第三十五条に係る部分に限る。）、第三十九条、第四十条、第三章並びに第八十七条第一項及び第二項の規定は、適用しない。
(2) In the case of a disaster, when using a building after receiving approval to change its designated use to that of a building for the public interest (which means a school, assembly hall or any other building similar thereto that is put to a use that is necessary for the public interest; the same shall apply in the next paragraph and Article 101, paragraph (1), item (xvi)), the provisions of paragraphs (1) through (4) of Article 12, Article 21, Article 22, Article 26, Article 30, Paragraph (2) of Article 34, Article 35, Article 36 (limited to parts related to Article 21, Article 26, paragraph (2) of Article 34, and Article 35), Article 39, Article 40, and Chapter III, and paragraphs (1) and (2) of Article 87 shall not apply to the relevant building for the public interest.
３　建築物の用途を変更して第一項の災害救助用建築物又は前項の公益的建築物とした者は、その用途の変更を完了した後三月を超えて当該建築物を引き続き災害救助用建築物又は公益的建築物として使用しようとする場合においては、その超えることとなる日前に、特定行政庁の許可を受けなければならない。ただし、当該許可の申請をした場合において、その超えることとなる日前に当該申請に対する処分がされないときは、当該処分がされるまでの間は、当該建築物を引き続き災害救助用建築物又は公益的建築物として使用することができる。
(3) A person who has changed the use of a building and used it as a building for disaster rescue as stated in paragraph (1) or a building for the public interest as stated in the preceding paragraph must obtain permission therefor from the Designated Administrative Agency before the date when the 3-month period is exceeded, when intending to continue to use the relevant building as a building for disaster rescue or a building for the public interest in excess of 3 months after completion of the relevant change of use. Provided, however, when an application for the relevant permission has been filed, if the application has not been processed before the date when the relevant period is exceeded, the person may use the relevant building continue to use building for disaster rescue or a building for the public interest until the relevant measures have been taken.
４　特定行政庁は、前項の許可の申請があつた場合において、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めるときは、二年以内の期間を限つて、その許可をすることができる。
(4) When that an application for permission in the preceding paragraph has been made, if the Designated Administrative Agency finds that the permission is not detrimental for safety, fire prevention, and sanitation, it may give relevant permission for a limited period of time within two years.
５　特定行政庁は、建築物の用途を変更して興行場等（興行場、博覧会建築物、店舗その他これらに類する建築物をいう。以下同じ。）とする場合における当該興行場等について安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がないと認めるときは、一年以内の期間（建築物の用途を変更して代替建築物（建築物の工事を施工するためその工事期間中当該従前の建築物に代えて使用する興行場、店舗その他これらに類する建築物をいう。）とする場合における当該代替建築物については、特定行政庁が当該工事の施工上必要と認める期間）を定めて、当該建築物を興行場等として使用することを許可することができる。この場合においては、第十二条第一項から第四項まで、第二十一条、第二十二条、第二十四条、第二十六条、第二十七条、第三十四条第二項、第三十五条の二、第三十五条の三、第三章及び第八十七条第二項の規定は、適用しない。
(5) When the use of a building is changed to a playhouse, etc. (which means a playhouse, exhibition building, store or any other building similar thereto; the same applies hereinafter), if the Designated Administrative Agency finds that the relevant playhouse is not detrimental for safety, fire prevention, and sanitation, it may grant permission for use of the relevant building as the playhouse, etc. by specifying a period not exceeding 1 year (when using a building by changing its designated use to that of another building (which means a playhouse, shop or any other building similar thereto to be used in place of the relevant former building in order to execute the construction work of a building during the period of the relevant work), a period deemed to be necessary by the Designated Administrative Agency from the viewpoint of execution of the relevant work, with respect to the relevant substitute building). In this case, the provisions of paragraphs (1) through (4) of Article 12, Article 21, Article 22, Article 24, Article 26, Article 27, paragraph (2) of Article 34, Article 35-2, Article 35-3, Chapter III, and paragraph (2) of Article 87 shall not apply.
６　特定行政庁は、建築物の用途を変更して特別興行場等（国際的な規模の会議又は競技会の用に供することその他の理由により一年を超えて使用する特別の必要がある興行場等をいう。以下この項において同じ。）とする場合における当該特別興行場等について、安全上、防火上及び衛生上支障がなく、かつ、公益上やむを得ないと認めるときは、前項の規定にかかわらず、当該特別興行場等の使用上必要と認める期間を定めて、当該建築物を特別興行場等として使用することを許可することができる。この場合においては、同項後段の規定を準用する。
(6) When the use of a building is changed to a playhouse, etc. (which means a playhouse, etc. of which use in excess of one year is particularly necessary due to reasons such as providing it for use for meetings or competitions of an international scale; the same applies hereinafter), if the Designated Administrative Agency finds that the relevant playhouse is not detrimental for safety, fire prevention, a which means a playhouse, etc. of which use in excess of one year is particularly necessary due to reasons such as providing it for use for meetings or competitions of an international scale and sanitation, and is unavoidable for the public interest, it may grant permission for the use of the relevant building as a special playhouse, etc., notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph, by specifying a period that is deemed necessary for the use of the relevant special playhouse, etc. In this case, the provisions of the latter part of that paragraph shall apply mutatis mutandis.
７　特定行政庁は、前項の規定による許可をする場合においては、あらかじめ、建築審査会の同意を得なければならない。
(7) The Designated Administrative Agency must obtain consent thereto from the Building Review Council in advance, when granting permission under the preceding paragraph.
（建築設備への準用）
(Mutatis Mutandis Application to Building Equipment)
第八十七条の四　政令で指定する昇降機その他の建築設備を第六条第一項第一号から第三号までに掲げる建築物に設ける場合においては、同項（第八十七条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による確認又は第十八条第二項（第八十七条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による通知を要する場合を除き、第六条（第三項、第五項及び第六項を除く。）、第六条の二（第三項を除く。）、第六条の四（第一項第一号及び第二号の建築物に係る部分に限る。）、第七条から第七条の四まで、第七条の五（第六条の四第一項第一号及び第二号の建築物に係る部分に限る。）、第七条の六、第十八条（第四項から第十三項まで及び第二十五項を除く。）及び第八十九条から第九十条の三までの規定を準用する。この場合において、第六条第四項中「同項第一号から第三号までに係るものにあつてはその受理した日から三十五日以内に、同項第四号に係るものにあつてはその受理した日から七日以内に」とあるのは、「その受理した日から七日以内に」と読み替えるものとする。
Article 87-4  When elevatory system or other building equipment designated by Cabinet Order are installed in buildings set forth in Article 6, paragraph (1), items (i) through (iii); excluding the cases where confirmation under that paragraph or notice under Article 18, paragraph (2) (both includes the case of mutatis mutandis application in Article 87, paragraph (1)) is required; the provisions of Article 6 (excluding paragraph (3) and paragraphs (5) through (12)), Article 6-2 (excluding paragraphs (3) through (8)), Article 6-3 (limited to parts concerning buildings in paragraph (1), items (i) and (ii)), Articles 7 through 7-4, Article 7-5 (limited to parts concerning buildings in Article 6-3 paragraph (1), items (i) and (ii)), Article 7-6, Article 18 (excluding paragraphs (4) through (11) and paragraph (23)) and Articles 89 through 90-3 shall apply mutatis mutandis. In this case, the term "within thirty-five days from the day of receipt in the case of buildings as mentioned in items (i) through (iii) of that paragraph, or within seven days from the day of receipt in the case of buildings as mentioned in item (iv) of that paragraph" in Article 6, paragraph (4) shall be replaced with "within seven days from the day of receipt."
（工作物への準用）
(Mutatis Mutandis Application to Structures)
第八十八条　煙突、広告塔、高架水槽、擁壁その他これらに類する工作物で政令で指定するもの及び昇降機、ウォーターシュート、飛行塔その他これらに類する工作物で政令で指定するもの（以下この項において「昇降機等」という。）については、第三条、第六条（第三項、第五項及び第六項を除くものとし、第一項及び第四項は、昇降機等については第一項第一号から第三号までの建築物に係る部分、その他のものについては同項第四号の建築物に係る部分に限る。）、第六条の二（第三項を除く。）、第六条の四（第一項第一号及び第二号の建築物に係る部分に限る。）、第七条から第七条の四まで、第七条の五（第六条の四第一項第一号及び第二号の建築物に係る部分に限る。）、第八条から第十一条まで、第十二条第五項（第三号を除く。）及び第六項から第九項まで、第十三条、第十五条の二、第十八条（第四項から第十三項まで及び第二十四項を除く。）、第二十条、第二十八条の二（同条各号に掲げる基準のうち政令で定めるものに係る部分に限る。）、第三十二条、第三十三条、第三十四条第一項、第三十六条（避雷設備及び昇降機に係る部分に限る。）、第三十七条、第三十八条、第四十条、第三章の二（第六十八条の二十第二項については、同項に規定する建築物以外の認証型式部材等に係る部分に限る。）、第八十六条の七第一項（第二十八条の二（第八十六条の七第一項の政令で定める基準に係る部分に限る。）に係る部分に限る。）、第八十六条の七第二項（第二十条に係る部分に限る。）、第八十六条の七第三項（第三十二条、第三十四条第一項及び第三十六条（昇降機に係る部分に限る。）に係る部分に限る。）、前条、次条並びに第九十条の規定を、昇降機等については、第七条の六、第十二条第一項から第四項まで、第十二条の二、第十二条の三及び第十八条第二十四項の規定を準用する。この場合において、第二十条第一項中「次の各号に掲げる建築物の区分に応じ、それぞれ当該各号に定める基準」とあるのは、「政令で定める技術的基準」と読み替えるものとする。
Article 88  (1) With respect to chimneys, advertisement towers, elevated water tanks, retaining walls and other structures similar thereto as designated by Cabinet Order and elevatory system, water chutes, aero-towers and other structures similar thereto as designated by Cabinet Order (referred to in this paragraph as "elevatory system, etc."), the provisions of Article 3, Article 6 (excluding paragraphs (3), (5) and (6); in paragraphs (1) and (4), limited to parts pertaining to buildings in paragraph (1), items (i) through (iii) as for elevatory system etc., and limited to parts pertaining to buildings in item (iv) of that paragraph as for other structures), Article 6-2 (excluding paragraph (3)), Article 6-4 (limited to parts concerning buildings in paragraph (1), items (i) and (ii)), Articles 7 through 7-4, Article 7-5 (limited to parts concerning buildings in Article 6-4, paragraph (1), items (i) and (ii)), Articles 8 through 11, Article 12, paragraph (5) (excluding item (iii)) and paragraphs (6) through (9), Article 13, Article 15-2, Article 18 (excluding paragraphs (4) through (13) and paragraph (24)), Article 20, Article 28-2 (limited to parts of standards set forth in each item of that Article concerning provisions specified by Cabinet Order) Article 32, Article 33, Article 34, paragraph (1), parts of Article 36 which pertain to Article 33 and Article 34, paragraph (1), Article 36 (limited to parts concerning lightening conductors and elevatory system), Article 37, Article 38, Article 40, Chapter III-2 (in the case of Article 68-20 paragraph (2), limited to parts concerning certified specific-type products other than buildings under that paragraph), Article 86-7, paragraph (1) (limited to parts concerning Article 28-2 (limited to parts concerning criteria specified by Cabinet Order Article 68-7 paragraph (1))). Article 86-7, paragraph (2) (limited to parts concerning Article 20), Article 86-7, paragraph (2) (limited to parts concerning Article 20), Article 86-7 paragraph (3) (limited to parts concerning Article 32, Article 34, paragraph (1) and Article 36 (limited to parts concerning elevatory system)) the preceding Article, the next Article, and Article 90 shall apply mutatis mutandis; with respect to elevatory system etc., the provisions of Article 7-6, Article 12, paragraphs (1) through (4), Article 12-2, Article 12-3, and Article 18, paragraph (24) shall apply mutatis mutandis. In this case, the term "the following criteria provided for in those items respectively according to classification of the building forest forth in each of the following items" in Article 20, paragraph (1) shall be replaced with, "technical criteria established by Cabinet Order."
２　製造施設、貯蔵施設、遊戯施設等の工作物で政令で指定するものについては、第三条、第六条（第三項、第五項及び第六項を除くものとし、第一項及び第四項は、第一項第一号から第三号までの建築物に係る部分に限る。）、第六条の二（第三項を除く。）、第七条、第七条の二、第七条の六から第九条の三まで、第十一条、第十二条第五項（第三号を除く。）及び第六項から第九項まで、第十三条、第十五条の二、第十八条（第四項から第十三項まで及び第十九項から第二十三項までを除く。）、第四十八条から第五十一条まで、第六十条の二第三項、第六十条の二の二第四項、第六十条の三第三項、第六十八条の二第一項及び第五項、第六十八条の三第六項から第九項まで、第八十六条の七第一項（第四十八条第一項から第十四項まで及び第五十一条に係る部分に限る。）、第八十七条第二項（第四十八条第一項から第十四項まで、第四十九条から第五十一条まで、第六十条の二第三項、第六十条の二の二第四項、第六十条の三第三項並びに第六十八条の二第一項及び第五項に係る部分に限る。）、第八十七条第三項（第四十八条第一項から第十四項まで、第四十九条から第五十一条まで及び第六十八条の二第一項に係る部分に限る。）、前条、次条、第九十一条、第九十二条の二並びに第九十三条の二の規定を準用する。この場合において、第六条第二項及び別表第二中「床面積の合計」とあるのは「築造面積」と、第六十八条の二第一項中「敷地、構造、建築設備又は用途」とあるのは「用途」と読み替えるものとする。
(2) With respect to manufacturing facilities, storage facilities, amusement facilities and other structures as designated by Cabinet Order, the provisions of Article 3, Article 6 (excluding paragraphs (3), (5), and (6); in paragraphs (1) and (4), limited to parts pertaining to buildings in paragraph (1), items (i) through (iii)), Article 6-2 (excluding paragraphs 3), Article 7, Article 7-2, Articles 7-6 through 9-3, Article 11, Article 12, paragraph (5) (excluding item (iii)), and paragraphs (6) through (9), Article 13, Article 15-2, Article 18 (excluding paragraphs (4) through (13) and (19) through (23)), Articles 48 through 51, Article 60-2, paragraph (3), Article 60-2-2, paragraph (4), and Article 60-3, paragraph (3), Article 68-2, paragraphs (1) and (5), Article 68-3, paragraphs (6) through (9), Article 86-7, paragraph (1) (limited to parts which pertain to Article 48, paragraphs (1) through (13) and Article 51), Article 87, paragraph (2) (limited to parts which pertain to Article 48, paragraphs (1) through (13), to Articles 49 through 51, to Article 60-3, paragraph (3) and Article 68-2, paragraphs (1) and (5), Article 87, paragraph (3) (limited to parts which pertain to Article 48, paragraphs (1) through (13), Articles 49 through 51, and Article 68-2, paragraph (1)), the preceding Article, the next Article, Article 91, Article 92-2, and Article 93-2 shall apply mutatis mutandis. In these cases, the term "an aggregate of floor areas" in Article 6, paragraph (2) and in Appended Table 2 shall be replaced with "construction areas", and "site, structure, building equipment or use" in Article 68-2, paragraph (1) shall be replaced with "use."
３　第三条、第八条から第十一条まで、第十二条（第五項第三号を除く。）、第十二条の二、第十二条の三、第十三条、第十五条の二並びに第十八条第一項及び第二十五項の規定は、第六十四条に規定する工作物について準用する。
(3) The provisions of Article 3, Articles 8 through 11, Article 12 (excluding paragraph (5), item (iii)), Article 12-2, Article 12-3, Article 13, Article 15-2, and Article 18, paragraphs (1) and (25) shall apply mutatis mutandis to structures specified in Article 66.
４　第一項中第六条から第七条の五まで、第十八条（第一項及び第二十五項を除く。）及び次条に係る部分は、宅地造成等規制法（昭和三十六年法律第百九十一号）第八条第一項本文若しくは第十二条第一項、都市計画法第二十九条第一項若しくは第二項若しくは第三十五条の二第一項本文又は津波防災地域づくりに関する法律（平成二十三年法律第百二十三号）第七十三条第一項若しくは第七十八条第一項の規定による許可を受けなければならない場合の擁壁については、適用しない。
(4) The part of paragraph (1) which pertains to Articles 6 through 7-5, Article 18 (excluding paragraphs (1) and 25) and the next Article shall not apply to retaining walls for which permission is required under Article 8, paragraph (1) main text or Article 12, paragraph (1) of the Act on Regulation of Residential Land Development (Act No. 191 of 1961), Article 29, paragraph (1) or (2) or Article 35-2, paragraph (1) main text of the City Planning Act or Article 73, paragraph (1) or Article 78, paragraph (1) of the Act on Regional Development for Tsunami Disaster Prevention (Act No. 123 of 2011).
（工事現場における確認の表示等）
(Indication of Confirmation in the Construction Field)
第八十九条　第六条第一項の建築、大規模の修繕又は大規模の模様替の工事の施工者は、当該工事現場の見易い場所に、国土交通省令で定める様式によつて、建築主、設計者、工事施工者及び工事の現場管理者の氏名又は名称並びに当該工事に係る同項の確認があつた旨の表示をしなければならない。
Article 89  (1) The executor of construction work for construction, major repair or major remodeling under Article 6, paragraph (1) must indicate the names or trade names of the building owner, designer, executor of construction work and field manager concerned, and the fact that the relevant construction work has been confirmed under that paragraph, at an easily visible place in the construction field concerned in the form specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
２　第六条第一項の建築、大規模の修繕又は大規模の模様替の工事の施工者は、当該工事に係る設計図書を当該工事現場に備えておかなければならない。
(2) The executor of construction work for construction, major repair or major remodeling under Article 6, paragraph (1) must keep the drawings/specifications for the relevant construction work in the construction field concerned.
（工事現場の危害の防止）
(Prevention of Danger in the Construction Field)
第九十条　建築物の建築、修繕、模様替又は除却のための工事の施工者は、当該工事の施工に伴う地盤の崩落、建築物又は工事用の工作物の倒壊等による危害を防止するために必要な措置を講じなければならない。
Article 90  (1) The executor of construction work for the construction, repair, remodeling or demolition of a building must take necessary measures for the prevention of that danger as may accompany the execution of the construction work concerned due to those reasons as the fall of groundwork, destruction of buildings or structures used for construction work, etc.
２　前項の措置の技術的基準は、政令で定める。
(2) Technical criteria for the measures mentioned in the preceding paragraph shall be specified by Cabinet Order.
３　第三条第二項及び第三項、第九条（第十三項及び第十四項を除く。）、第九条の二、第九条の三（設計者及び宅地建物取引業者に係る部分を除く。）並びに第十八条第一項及び第二十五項の規定は、第一項の工事の施工について準用する。
(3) The provisions of Article 3, paragraphs (2) and (3), Article 9 (excluding paragraphs (13) and (14)), Article 9-2, Article 9-3 (excluding the parts of the provisions pertaining to the designer and the land and house agent), and Article 18, paragraphs (1) and 23 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the execution of construction work under paragraph (1).
（工事中の特殊建築物等に対する措置）
(Measures for Special Buildings under Construction)
第九十条の二　特定行政庁は、第九条又は第十条の規定による場合のほか、建築、修繕若しくは模様替又は除却の工事の施工中に使用されている第六条第一項第一号から第三号までの建築物が、安全上、防火上又は避難上著しく支障があると認める場合においては、当該建築物の建築主又は所有者、管理者若しくは占有者に対して、相当の猶予期限を付けて、当該建築物の使用禁止、使用制限その他安全上、防火上又は避難上必要な措置を採ることを命ずることができる。
Article 90-2  (1) The Designated Administrative Agency may order the building owner, owner, custodian, or occupant of the relevant building to prohibit or restrict the use thereof, or otherwise take measures necessary for safety, fire prevention, or evacuation, providing a reasonable grace period for those measures to be taken, in addition to cases under Article 9 or 10, when it is concluded that a building as specified in Article 6, paragraph (1), items (i) through (iii) being used during construction, repair, remodeling, or demolition is an extreme hazard from the viewpoint of safety, fire prevention, or evacuation.
２　第九条第二項から第九項まで及び第十一項から第十五項までの規定は、前項の場合に準用する。
(2) The provisions of Article 9, paragraphs (2) through (9), and paragraphs (11) through (15) shall apply mutatis mutandis in cases as specified in the preceding paragraph.
（工事中における安全上の措置等に関する計画の届出）
(Submission of Plans concerning Measures for Safety during Construction)
第九十条の三　別表第一（い）欄の（一）項、（二）項及び（四）項に掲げる用途に供する建築物並びに地下の工作物内に設ける建築物で政令で定めるものの新築の工事又はこれらの建築物に係る避難施設等に関する工事の施工中において当該建築物を使用し、又は使用させる場合においては、当該建築主は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、あらかじめ、当該工事の施工中における当該建築物の安全上、防火上又は避難上の措置に関する計画を作成して特定行政庁に届け出なければならない。
Article 90-3  If the building owners of buildings for use set forth in column (a), rows (1), (2) and (4) of Appended Table 1, and those to be built inside underground structures as specified by Cabinet Order use or let others use the relevant buildings while they are being constructed or while other construction work is executed on the evacuation facilities, etc. of the relevant buildings, they must prepare a safety, fire prevention and evacuation plan for the relevant buildings during the construction work concerned and submit it to the Designated Administrative Agency prior to the use of the relevant building, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（建築物の敷地が区域、地域又は地区の内外にわたる場合の措置）
(Measures for Building Sites Extending Outside Areas, Districts or Zones)
第九十一条　建築物の敷地がこの法律の規定（第五十二条、第五十三条、第五十四条から第五十六条の二まで、第五十七条の二、第五十七条の三、第六十七条第一項及び第二項並びに別表第三の規定を除く。以下この条において同じ。）による建築物の敷地、構造、建築設備又は用途に関する禁止又は制限を受ける区域（第二十二条第一項の市街地の区域を除く。以下この条において同じ。）、地域（防火地域及び準防火地域を除く。以下この条において同じ。）又は地区（高度地区を除く。以下この条において同じ。）の内外にわたる場合においては、その建築物又はその敷地の全部について敷地の過半の属する区域、地域又は地区内の建築物に関するこの法律の規定又はこの法律に基づく命令の規定を適用する。
Article 91  If a building site extends outside an "area" (excluding areas in urban areas as specified in Article 22, paragraph (1); the same in this Article), "zone" (excluding Fire Prevention Districts and Quasi-fire Prevention Districts; the same in this Article) or "district" (excluding Height Control Districts; the same in this Article) which is subject to prohibition or restriction concerning the site, structure, building equipment or use of buildings under the provision of this Act (excluding the provisions of Article 52, Article 53, Articles 54 through 56-2, Article 57-2, Article 57-3, Article 67, paragraphs (1) and (2), and Appended Table 3; the same in this Article), the provisions of this Act or those of orders based thereon applicable to buildings in the "area", "zone" or "district" to which the majority of the site belongs shall apply to the entire building or site.
（面積、高さ及び階数の算定）
(Calculation of Area, Height and Number of Stories)
第九十二条　建築物の敷地面積、建築面積、延べ面積、床面積及び高さ、建築物の軒、天井及び床の高さ、建築物の階数並びに工作物の築造面積の算定方法は、政令で定める。
Article 92  Calculation methods of the site area, building area, total floor area, floor area and height of a building, the height of eaves, ceiling and floor of a building, number of stories of a building, and the construction area of a structure shall be specified by Cabinet Order.
（許可の条件）
(Requirements Governing Permission)
第九十二条の二　この法律の規定による許可には、建築物又は建築物の敷地を交通上、安全上、防火上又は衛生上支障がないものとするための条件その他必要な条件を付することができる。この場合において、その条件は、当該許可を受けた者に不当な義務を課するものであつてはならない。
Article 92-2  Permission granted under this Act can be granted subject to requirements required to prevent the building or the building site from having a detrimental effect on traffic, safety, fire prevention, or sanitation, or any other requirements deemed necessary. In this case, these requirements shall not compel the person receiving the permission concerned to fulfill unreasonable obligations.
（許可又は確認に関する消防長等の同意等）
(Consent of Fire Inspector, etc. Relating to Permission or Confirmation)
第九十三条　特定行政庁、建築主事又は指定確認検査機関は、この法律の規定による許可又は確認をする場合においては、当該許可又は確認に係る建築物の工事施工地又は所在地を管轄する消防長（消防本部を置かない市町村にあつては、市町村長。以下同じ。）又は消防署長の同意を得なければ、当該許可又は確認をすることができない。ただし、確認に係る建築物が防火地域及び準防火地域以外の区域内における住宅（長屋、共同住宅その他政令で定める住宅を除く。）である場合又は建築主事若しくは指定確認検査機関が第八十七条の四において準用する第六条第一項若しくは第六条の二第一項の規定による確認をする場合においては、この限りでない。
Article 93  (1) When a Designated Administrative Agency, a building official, or a designated confirmation and inspection body gives permission or confirmation under this Act, it shall not give the relevant permission or confirmation unless it obtains consent from the fire inspector (in a municipality without a fire department, the head thereof; the same applies hereinafter) or the chief of the fire station having jurisdiction over the work execution district or the location of the building subject to that permission or confirmation. Provided, however, that this shall not apply if the buildings requiring confirmation are houses (excluding row houses, apartment houses, and other houses specified by Cabinet Order), located in areas other than Fire Prevention Districts or Quasi-fire Prevention Districts or when building official or the designated confirmation and inspection body performs a confirmation under Article 6, paragraph (1) or Article 6-2, paragraph (1) as applied mutatis mutandis in Article 87-4.
２　消防長又は消防署長は、前項の規定によつて同意を求められた場合においては、当該建築物の計画が法律又はこれに基づく命令若しくは条例の規定（建築主事又は指定確認検査機関が第六条の四第一項第一号若しくは第二号に掲げる建築物の建築、大規模の修繕、大規模の模様替若しくは用途の変更又は同項第三号に掲げる建築物の建築について確認する場合において同意を求められたときは、同項の規定により読み替えて適用される第六条第一項の政令で定める建築基準法令の規定を除く。）で建築物の防火に関するものに違反しないものであるときは、同項第四号に係る場合にあつては、同意を求められた日から三日以内に、その他の場合にあつては、同意を求められた日から七日以内に同意を与えてその旨を当該特定行政庁、建築主事又は指定確認検査機関に通知しなければならない。この場合において、消防長又は消防署長は、同意することができない事由があると認めるときは、これらの期限内に、その事由を当該特定行政庁、建築主事又は指定確認検査機関に通知しなければならない。
(2) When a plan for the building for which the consent of the fire chief or the fire station chief is requested as specified in the preceding paragraph is not in violation of the provisions of Acts or those of orders or ordinances based thereon concerning fire prevention in buildings (excluding provisions of building standard laws and regulations specified by Cabinet Order under Article 6, paragraph (1) as applied by replacing phrases therein pursuant to the provisions of that paragraph, if consent is requested for the construction of buildings set forth in Article 6-4, paragraph (1), item (i) or (ii), major repair, major remodeling, change of use of buildings, or the construction of buildings set forth in item (iii) of that paragraph, which are to be confirmed by a building official or by a designated confirmation and inspection body), the fire chief or the fire station chief concerned must give one's consent to the relevant plan for the building and notify the relevant Designated Administrative Agency, building official, or the designated confirmation and inspection body of the consent within three days from the day of request in cases coming under Article 6, paragraph (1), item (iv), and within seven days in other cases. In this case, if the fire chief or the fire station chief finds that there is a reason for not being able to consent, the fire chief or the fire station chief must notify the Designated Administrative Agency, the building official, or the designated confirmation and inspection body of the reason within that period.
３　第六十八条の二十第一項（第六十八条の二十二第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定は、消防長又は消防署長が第一項の規定によつて同意を求められた場合に行う審査について準用する。
(3) The provision of Article 68-20, paragraph (1) (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 68-22, paragraph (2)) shall apply mutatis mutandis to an examination performed by a fire inspector or the chief of a fire station requested under paragraph (1).
４　建築主事又は指定確認検査機関は、第一項ただし書の場合において第六条第一項（第八十七条の四において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による確認申請書を受理したとき若しくは第六条の二第一項（第八十七条の四において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による確認の申請を受けたとき又は第十八条第二項（第八十七条第一項又は第八十七条の四において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による通知を受けた場合においては、遅滞なく、これを当該申請又は通知に係る建築物の工事施工地又は所在地を管轄する消防長又は消防署長に通知しなければならない。
(4) In those cases coming under the proviso of paragraph (1) as where a building official or a designated confirmation and inspection body has received an application for confirmation under Article 6, paragraph (1) (including cases where this paragraph applies mutatis mutandis in Article 87-4) or has received an application for confirmation under Article 6-2, paragraph (1) (including cases where this paragraph applies mutatis mutandis in Article 87-4), or a notice under Article 18, paragraph (2) (including cases where this paragraph applies mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (1) or Article 87-2), the building official or a designated confirmation and inspection body must notify the fire inspector or the chief of the fire station having jurisdiction over the work execution district or the location of the building concerned as mentioned in the relevant application or notice, of that receipt without delay.
５　建築主事又は指定確認検査機関は、第三十一条第二項に規定する屎（し）尿浄化槽又は建築物における衛生的環境の確保に関する法律（昭和四十五年法律第二十号）第二条第一項に規定する特定建築物に該当する建築物に関して、第六条第一項（第八十七条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による確認の申請書を受理した場合、第六条の二第一項（第八十七条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による確認の申請を受けた場合又は第十八条第二項（第八十七条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による通知を受けた場合においては、遅滞なく、これを当該申請又は通知に係る建築物の工事施工地又は所在地を管轄する保健所長に通知しなければならない。
(5) When a building official or the designated confirmation and inspection body has accepted an application for confirmation under Article 6, paragraph (1) (including cases where this paragraph applies mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (1)), has received an application for confirmation under Article 6-2, paragraph (1) (including cases where this paragraph applies mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (1)) or a notice under Article 18, paragraph (2) (including cases where this paragraph applies mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (1)), in regard to a wastewater purifier as specified in Article 31, paragraph (2) or to a building regarded as a specified building under Article 2, paragraph (1) of the Act on Maintenance of Sanitation in Buildings (Act No. 20 of 1970), a building official or the designated confirmation and inspection body must notify the chief of the health center having jurisdiction over the work execution district or the location of the building concerned as mentioned in the relevant application or notice, of that receipt without delay.
６　保健所長は、必要があると認める場合においては、この法律の規定による許可又は確認について、特定行政庁、建築主事又は指定確認検査機関に対して意見を述べることができる。
(6) The chief of the health center may give one's opinion to the Designated Administrative Agency, building official, or the designated confirmation and inspection body as to permission or confirmation under this Act, if the chief deems it necessary.
（書類の閲覧）
(Public Perusal of Documents)
第九十三条の二　特定行政庁は、確認その他の建築基準法令の規定による処分並びに第十二条第一項及び第三項の規定による報告に関する書類のうち、当該処分若しくは報告に係る建築物若しくは建築物の敷地の所有者、管理者若しくは占有者又は第三者の権利利益を不当に侵害するおそれがないものとして国土交通省令で定めるものについては、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、閲覧の請求があつた場合には、これを閲覧させなければならない。
Article 93-2  Designated Administrative Agency must made available for public perusal on request, the documents concerning confirmations and other actions under the building standard laws and regulations, and reports under Article 12, paragraphs (1) and (3), when that will not improperly infringe on the rights and interests of owners, custodians, or occupants of the building or building site related to the relevant actions and reports, or of third parties, specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（国土交通省令への委任）
(Entrustment to Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order)
第九十三条の三　この法律に定めるもののほか、この法律の規定に基づく許可その他の処分に関する手続その他この法律の実施のため必要な事項は、国土交通省令で定める。
Article 93-3  In addition to the provisions of this Act, procedures of permission and other actions and other necessary items for the execution of this Act shall be specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（不服申立て）
(Filing of Complaints)
第九十四条　建築基準法令の規定による特定行政庁、建築主事若しくは建築監視員、都道府県知事、指定確認検査機関又は指定構造計算適合性判定機関の処分又はその不作為についての審査請求は、行政不服審査法第四条第一号に規定する処分庁又は不作為庁が、特定行政庁、建築主事若しくは建築監視員又は都道府県知事である場合にあつては当該市町村又は都道府県の建築審査会に、指定確認検査機関である場合にあつては当該処分又は不作為に係る建築物又は工作物について第六条第一項（第八十七条第一項、第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第一項若しくは第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による確認をする権限を有する建築主事が置かれた市町村又は都道府県の建築審査会に、指定構造計算適合性判定機関である場合にあつては第十八条の二第一項の規定により当該指定構造計算適合性判定機関にその構造計算適合性判定を行わせた都道府県知事が統括する都道府県の建築審査会に対してするものとする。この場合において、不作為についての審査請求は、建築審査会に代えて、当該不作為庁が、特定行政庁、建築主事、建築監視員又は都道府県知事である場合にあつては当該市町村の長又は都道府県知事に、指定確認検査機関である場合にあつては当該指定確認検査機関に、指定構造計算適合性判定機関である場合にあつては当該指定構造計算適合性判定機関に対してすることもできる。
Article 94  (1) Demands for investigations under the provisions of Article 4, item (i) of the Administrative Appeal Act, concerning actions performed or omitted by a Designated Administrative Agency, building official, building surveillant, prefectural governor, designated confirmation and inspection body, or designated structural calculation conformity review body under the building standard laws and regulations shall be submitted to the Building Review Council of the relevant city, town, village, or prefecture in the case of actions taken or omitted by a Designated Administrative Agency, building official, building surveillant, or prefectural governor, to the Building Review Council of the city, town, village, or prefecture where the building official with the authority to carry out confirmations under Article 6, paragraph (1) (including cases in which the provisions of Article 87, paragraph (1), Article 87-4, or Article 88, paragraph (1) or (2) are applied mutatis mutandis) is located in the case of actions performed or omitted by a designated confirmation and inspection body, and to the Building Review Council of the prefecture governed by the governor that allowed the relevant designated confirmation and inspection body to perform structural calculation conformity reviews pursuant to the provisions of Article 18-2, paragraph (1) in the case of a designated structural calculation conformity review body. In those cases, demands for the investigation of actions omitted can be submitted to the head of the municipality concerned or the prefectural governor, instead of the Building Review Council, in the case of an action omitted by a Designated Administrative Agency, building official, building surveillant, or prefectural governor, to the designated confirmation and inspection body concerned in the case of an action omitted by a designated confirmation and inspection body, and to the designated structural calculation conformity review body concerned in the case of an action omitted by a designated structural calculation conformity review body.
２　建築審査会は、前項前段の規定による審査請求がされた場合においては、当該審査請求がされた日（行政不服審査法第二十三条の規定により不備を補正すべきことを命じた場合にあつては、当該不備が補正された日）から一月以内に、裁決をしなければならない。
(2) When the Building Review Council has received an investigation demand under the first part of the preceding paragraph, it must render its ruling within one month from the date on which the investigation demand was filed (if an order for the rectification of a deficiency has been issued pursuant to the provisions of Article 23 of the Administrative Appeal Act), from the date on which that deficiency was rectified).
３　建築審査会は、前項の裁決を行う場合においては、行政不服審査法第二十四条の規定により当該審査請求を却下する場合を除き、あらかじめ、審査請求人、特定行政庁、建築主事、建築監視員、都道府県知事、指定確認検査機関、指定構造計算適合性判定機関その他の関係人又はこれらの者の代理人の出頭を求めて、公開による口頭審査を行わなければならない。
(3) Except when it has decided to reject an investigation demand pursuant to the provisions of Article 24 of the Administrative Appeal Act, the Building Review Council shall, when determining its ruling, first hold a public oral inquiry at which it must seek the presence of the person demanding the investigation, the Designated Administrative Agency, the building official, the building surveillant, prefectural governor, the designated confirmation and inspection body, the designated structural calculation conformity review body, or any other person concerned, or the agent thereof.
４　第一項前段の規定による審査請求については、行政不服審査法第三十一条の規定は適用せず、前項の口頭審査については、同法第九条第三項の規定により読み替えられた同法第三十一条第二項から第五項までの規定を準用する。
(4) The provisions of Article 31 of the Administrative Appeal Act shall not be applied to investigation demands under the first part of paragraph (1). The provisions of paragraphs (2) through (5) of that Act as replaced pursuant to the provisions of Article 9, paragraph (3) of that Act shall be applied to oral hearings in the preceding paragraph, mutatis mutandis.
第九十五条　建築審査会の裁決に不服がある者は、国土交通大臣に対して再審査請求をすることができる。
Article 95  Any person aggrieved by the ruling of the Building Review Council may make an appeal against the ruling to the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism.
第九十六条　削除
Article 96  Deleted
（権限の委任）
(Assignment of Authority)
第九十七条　この法律に規定する国土交通大臣の権限は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、その一部を地方整備局長又は北海道開発局長に委任することができる。
Article 97  It shall be possible to assign part of the authority of the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism provided for in this Act to the Director-General of a Regional Development Bureau or to the Director-General of the Hokkaido Bureau as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
（市町村の建築主事等の特例）
(Special Rules regarding Building Officials of Municipality)
第九十七条の二　第四条第一項の市以外の市又は町村においては、同条第二項の規定によるほか、当該市町村の長の指揮監督の下に、この法律中建築主事の権限に属するものとされている事務で政令で定めるものをつかさどらせるために、建築主事を置くことができる。この場合においては、この法律中建築主事に関する規定は、当該市町村が置く建築主事に適用があるものとする。
Article 97-2  (1) Any city other than cities as specified in Article 4, paragraph (1), or town or village may appoint building officials under the direction and supervision of the head of the relevant municipality in order to have them take charge of the affairs which are specified by Cabinet Order from among those considered to be under the authority of building officials in this Act, in addition to following the provisions of paragraph (2) of that Article. In this case, the provisions applicable to building officials in this Act shall apply to those building officials appointed by the relevant municipality.
２　第四条第三項及び第四項の規定は、前項の市町村が同項の規定により建築主事を置く場合に準用する。
(2) The provisions of Article 4, paragraphs (3) and (4) shall apply mutatis mutandis when a municipality as mentioned in the preceding paragraph appoints building officials pursuant to the provisions of that paragraph.
３　第一項の規定により建築主事を置く市町村は、同項の規定により建築主事が行うこととなる事務に関する限り、この法律の規定の適用については、第四条第五項に規定する建築主事を置く市町村とみなす。この場合において、第七十八条第一項中「置く」とあるのは、「置くことができる」とする。
(3) A municipality appointing building officials pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (1) shall, insofar as the affairs to be executed by building officials pursuant to the provisions of that paragraph are concerned, be considered to be a municipality having building officials as specified in Article 4, paragraph (5) in applying the provisions of this Act. In this case, "appoint" in Article 78, paragraph (1) shall read "can appoint".
４　この法律中都道府県知事たる特定行政庁の権限に属する事務で政令で定めるものは、政令で定めるところにより、第一項の規定により建築主事を置く市町村の長が行なうものとする。この場合においては、この法律中都道府県知事たる特定行政庁に関する規定は、当該市町村の長に関する規定として当該市町村の長に適用があるものとする。
(4) Affairs which are specified by Cabinet Order from among those under the authority of, that functions as the Designated Administrative Agency the prefectural governor under this Act, shall be executed by the head of a municipality appointing building officials pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (1), as specified by Cabinet Order. In this case, provisions applicable to the prefectural governor, that functions as the Designated Administrative Agency under this Act, shall apply to the mayor of the relevant municipality as the provisions applicable to the head of the relevant municipality.
５　第一項の規定により建築主事を置く市町村の長たる特定行政庁、同項の建築主事又は当該特定行政庁が命じた建築監視員の建築基準法令の規定による処分又はその不作為についての審査請求は、当該市町村に建築審査会が置かれていないときは、当該市町村を包括する都道府県の建築審査会に対してするものとする。この場合において、不作為についての審査請求は、建築審査会に代えて、当該不作為に係る市町村の長に対してすることもできる。
(5) Investigation demands concerning actions taken or omitted under the building standard laws and regulations by the Designated Administrative Agency as the head of a municipality appointing building officials pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (1) and , by building officials in that paragraph, or by a building surveillant so ordered by the relevant Designated Administrative Agency shall be submitted to the Building Review Council of the prefecture where the relevant municipality is located, when a Building Review Council is not established therein. Investigation demands concerning actions omitted can be submitted to the head of the municipality concerned, instead of the Building Review Council.
（特別区の特例）
(Special Rules regarding Special Wards)
第九十七条の三　特別区においては、第四条第二項の規定によるほか、特別区の長の指揮監督の下に、この法律中建築主事の権限に属するものとされている事務で政令で定めるものをつかさどらせるために、建築主事を置くことができる。この場合においては、この法律中建築主事に関する規定は、特別区が置く建築主事に適用があるものとする。
Article 97-3  (1) A special ward may appoint building officials under the direction and supervision of the head of the special ward, in order to have them take charge of the affairs which are specified by Cabinet Order from among those considered to be under the authority of building officials in this Act, in addition to following the provisions of Article 4, paragraph (2). In this case, the provisions applicable to building officials in this Act shall apply to those building officials appointed by the special ward.
２　前項の規定は、特別区に置かれる建築主事の権限に属しない特別区の区域における事務をつかさどらせるために、都が都知事の指揮監督の下に建築主事を置くことを妨げるものではない。
(2) The provisions of the preceding paragraph shall not preclude the Metropolis from appointing building officials under the direction and supervision of the metropolitan governor, in order to have them take charge of the affairs in the area of a special ward not under to the authority of building officials appointed by the special ward.
３　この法律中都道府県知事たる特定行政庁の権限に属する事務で政令で定めるものは、政令で定めるところにより、特別区の長が行なうものとする。この場合においては、この法律中都道府県知事たる特定行政庁に関する規定は、特別区の長に関する規定として特別区の長に適用があるものとする。
(3) Affairs which are specified by Cabinet Order from among those under the authority of the prefectural governor that functions as the Designated Administrative Agency under this Act shall be conducted by the head of the special ward as specified by Cabinet Order. In this case, the provisions applicable to the prefectural governor that functions as the Designated Administrative Agency under this Act shall apply to the head of the special ward as the provisions applicable to the head of the special ward.
４　特別区が第四条第二項の規定により建築主事を置こうとする場合における同条第三項及び第四項の規定の適用については、同条第三項中「協議しなければ」とあるのは「協議し、その同意を得なければ」と、同条第四項中「により協議して」とあるのは「による同意を得た場合において」とする。
(4) If it is intended to appoint a building official in a special ward pursuant to the provisions of Article 4, paragraph (2), "shall engage in prior consultation" in Article 4, paragraph (3) will be read as "shall engage in prior consultation and obtain consent" and "based on consultation" in Article 4, paragraph (4) as "if consent is obtained" when applying the provisions of Article 4, paragraphs (3) and (4).
（手数料）
(Fee)
第九十七条の四　国土交通大臣が行う次に掲げる処分の申請をしようとする者は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、実費を勘案して国土交通省令で定める額の手数料を国に納めなければならない。
Article 97-4  (1) A person applying for the following actions by the Minister of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism must pay to the national government a fee specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order based on the actual expenses, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order:
一　構造方法等の認定
(i) approval of construction methods, etc.;
二　特殊構造方法等認定
(ii) approval of special construction methods;
三　型式適合認定
(iii) type-approval;
四　第六十八条の十一第一項の認証又はその更新
(iv) certification under Article 68-11, paragraph (1) or its renewal;
五　第六十八条の二十二第一項の認証又はその更新
(v) certification under Article 68-22, paragraph (1) or its renewal.
２　指定認定機関、承認認定機関、指定性能評価機関又は承認性能評価機関が行う前項第三号から第五号までに掲げる処分又は性能評価の申請をしようとする者は、国土交通省令で定めるところにより、実費を勘案して国土交通省令で定める額の手数料を当該指定認定機関、承認認定機関、指定性能評価機関又は承認性能評価機関に納めなければならない。
(2) A person applying for actions by a designated approval body, recognized approval body, designated performance evaluation body, or recognized performance evaluation body set forth in items (iii) through (v) of the preceding paragraph must pay a fee specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order based on the actual expenses to the relevant body, as specified by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism Order.
３　前項の規定により指定認定機関、承認認定機関、指定性能評価機関又は承認性能評価機関に納められた手数料は、当該指定認定機関、承認認定機関、指定性能評価機関又は承認性能評価機関の収入とする。
(3) The fee paid to the designated approval body, recognized approval body, designated performance evaluation body, or recognized performance evaluation body pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph shall be proceeds of the relevant body.
（事務の区分）
(Apportionment of Duties)
第九十七条の五　第十五条第四項、第十六条及び第七十七条の六十三の規定により都道府県が処理することとされている事務並びに第十五条第一項から第三項までの規定により市町村が処理することとされている事務は、地方自治法（昭和二十二年法律第六十七号）第二条第九項第一号に規定する第一号法定受託事務とする。
Article 97-5  (1) Duties performed by the prefectures pursuant to the provisions of Article 15, paragraph (4), Article 16 and Article 77-63, and duties performed by municipalities pursuant to the provisions of Article 15, paragraphs (1) through (3) shall be item (i) legally commissioned duties provided by Article 2, paragraph (9), item (i) of the Local Autonomy Act (Act No. 67 of 1947).
２　第七十条第四項（第七十四条第二項（第七十六条の三第六項において準用する場合を含む。以下この項において同じ。）及び第七十六条の三第四項において準用する場合を含む。）、第七十一条（第七十四条第二項及び第七十六条の三第四項において準用する場合を含む。）、第七十二条（同条第二項の規定により建築協定書に意見を付する事務に係る部分を除き、第七十四条第二項及び第七十六条の三第四項において準用する場合を含む。）及び第七十三条第三項（第七十四条第二項、第七十五条の二第四項及び第七十六条の三第四項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定により市町村（建築主事を置かない市町村に限る。）が処理することとされている事務は、地方自治法第二条第九項第二号に規定する第二号法定受託事務とする。
(2) Duties that are performed by municipalities (limited to municipalities without a building official) pursuant to the provisions of Article 70, paragraph (4) (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 74, paragraph (2) (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 76-3, paragraph (6); the same in this paragraph) and in Article 76-3, paragraph (4)), Article 71 (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 74, paragraph (2) and in Article 76-3, paragraph (4)), Article 72 (including cases where excluding parts concerning the duty to append opinions to a written building agreement pursuant to paragraph (2) of this Article, it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 74, paragraph (2) and Article 76-3, paragraph (4)) and Article 73, paragraph (3) (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 74, paragraph (2), Article 75-2, paragraph (4) and Article 76-3, paragraph (4)) shall be item (ii) legally commissioned duties specified in Article 2, paragraph (9), item (ii) of the Local Autonomy Act.
（経過措置）
(Transitional Measures)
第九十七条の六　この法律の規定に基づき命令を制定し、又は改廃する場合においては、その命令で、その制定又は改廃に伴い合理的に必要と判断される範囲内において、所要の経過措置（罰則に関する経過措置を含む。）を定めることができる。
Article 97-6  In enacting, amending or abolishing an order under this Act, that order may provide for certain transitional measures (including transitional measures concerning) penal provisions) within the limits considered reasonably necessary for that enactment, amendment or abolition.
第七章　罰則
Chapter VII Penal Provisions
第九十八条　次の各号のいずれかに該当する者は、三年以下の懲役又は三百万円以下の罰金に処する。
Article 98  (1) Any person who comes under any of the following items shall be penalized with imprisonment with forced labor for not more than three years or a fine of not more than three million yen:
一　第九条第一項又は第十項前段（これらの規定を第八十八条第一項から第三項まで又は第九十条第三項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による特定行政庁又は建築監視員の命令に違反した者
(i) a person who has violated an order issued by a Designated Administrative Agency or a building surveillant under Article 9, paragraph (1) or first part of paragraph (10) (including cases where these provisions apply mutatis mutandis in Article 88, paragraphs (1) through (3) or Article 90, paragraph (3));
二　第二十条（第一項第一号から第三号までに係る部分に限る。）、第二十一条、第二十六条、第二十七条、第三十五条又は第三十五条の二の規定に違反した場合における当該建築物又は建築設備の設計者（設計図書に記載された認定建築材料等（型式適合認定に係る型式の建築材料若しくは建築物の部分、構造方法等の認定に係る構造方法を用いる建築物の部分若しくは建築材料又は特殊構造方法等認定に係る特殊の構造方法を用いる建築物の部分若しくは特殊の建築材料をいう。以下同じ。）の全部又は一部として当該認定建築材料等の全部又は一部と異なる建築材料又は建築物の部分を引き渡した場合においては当該建築材料又は建築物の部分を引き渡した者、設計図書を用いないで工事を施工し、又は設計図書に従わないで工事を施工した場合（設計図書に記載された認定建築材料等と異なる建築材料又は建築物の部分を引き渡された場合において、当該建築材料又は建築物の部分を使用して工事を施工した場合を除く。）においては当該建築物又は建築設備の工事施工者）
(ii) the designer of the relevant building or building equipment in the case of a violation of the provisions of Article 20 (limited to parts relating to items (i) through (iii)), Article 21, Article 26, Article 27, Article 35, or Article 35-2 (the person who delivered building materials or parts that were partially or completely different from the approved building materials, etc., stated in the drawing/specifications (building materials or parts a type covered by a type-approval, or building parts made using a construction method covered by the approval of a construction method, etc., or building parts made using a special construction method covered by the approval of a special construction method, etc., or special construction materials; the same applies hereinafter) as part or all of the approved building materials, etc., or the construction executor for the building or building equipment if the relevant building or building equipment were not built in accordance with the drawing/specifications (in cases in which building materials or parts that differed from the approved building materials, etc., in the drawing/specifications were delivered, excluding cases in which construction work was carried out using the relevant building materials or parts);
三　第三十六条（防火壁、防火床及び防火区画の設置及び構造に係る部分に限る。）の規定に基づく政令の規定に違反した場合における当該建築物の設計者（設計図書に記載された認定建築材料等の全部又は一部として当該認定建築材料等の全部又は一部と異なる建築材料又は建築物の部分を引き渡した場合においては当該建築材料又は建築物の部分を引き渡した者、設計図書を用いないで工事を施工し、又は設計図書に従わないで工事を施工した場合（設計図書に記載された認定建築材料等と異なる建築材料又は建築物の部分を引き渡された場合において、当該建築材料又は建築物の部分を使用して工事を施工した場合を除く。）においては当該建築物の工事施工者）
(iii) the designer of the relevant building in the case of a violation of the provisions of Cabinet Order under the provisions of Article 36 (limited to parts related to the installation and construction of fire walls, fire floors and fire compartment) (if building materials, etc., were delivered and all or part thereof were different from the approved building materials, etc., stated in the drawing/specifications, the person who delivered the relevant building materials or building parts, or if construction work was executed without using the drawing/specifications (if building materials and a part of the building that are different from the approved building materials, etc. stated in the drawing/specifications has been delivered, excluding when construction work was carried out using the relevant building materials or a part of the building) the construction executor of the relevant building);
四　第八十七条第三項において準用する第二十七条、第三十五条又は第三十五条の二の規定に違反した場合における当該建築物の所有者、管理者又は占有者
(iv) the owner, custodian, or occupant of the relevant building in the case of violation of the provisions of Article 27, Article 35 or Article 35-2 applied mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (3);
五　第八十七条第三項において準用する第三十六条（防火壁、防火床及び防火区画の設置及び構造に関して、第三十五条の規定を実施し、又は補足するために安全上及び防火上必要な技術的基準に係る部分に限る。）の規定に基づく政令の規定に違反した場合における当該建築物の所有者、管理者又は占有者
(v) the owner, custodian, or occupant of the relevant building in the case of violation of the provisions of Cabinet Order under the provisions of Article 36 applied mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (3) (limited to parts related to technical criteria necessary for safety and fire protection in order to enforce or to supplement the provisions of Article 35 concerning the installation and construction of fire walls, fire floors and fire compartment).
２　前項第二号又は第三号に規定する違反があつた場合において、その違反が建築主又は建築設備の設置者の故意によるものであるときは、当該設計者又は工事施工者を罰するほか、当該建築主又は建築設備の設置者に対して同項の刑を科する。
(2) When a violation of the provisions of item (ii) or (iii) of the preceding paragraph is a violation that has been made purposely by the owner or the installer of the building equipment, in addition to the penalization of the relevant designer or contractor, the relevant owner or installer of the building equipment shall be punished under that paragraph.
第九十九条　次の各号のいずれかに該当する者は、一年以下の懲役又は百万円以下の罰金に処する。
Article 99  (1) Any person coming under any of the following items shall be punished with imprisonment with forced labor for not more than one year, or a fine of not more than one million yen:
一　第六条第一項（第八十七条第一項、第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第一項若しくは第二項において準用する場合を含む。）、第七条の六第一項（第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第二項において準用する場合を含む。）又は第六十八条の十九第二項（第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定に違反した者
(i) a person who has violated the provisions of Article 6, paragraph (1) (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (1), Article 87-4 or Article 88, paragraph (1) or paragraph (2)), Article 7-6, paragraph (1) (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 87-2 or Article 88, paragraph (2)) or Article 68-19, paragraph (2) (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 88, paragraph (1));
二　第六条第八項（第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第一項若しくは第二項において準用する場合を含む。）又は第七条の三第六項（第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定に違反した場合における当該建築物、工作物又は建築設備の工事施工者
(ii) the executor of construction work of the relevant building, structures or building equipment in the case of a violation under the provisions of Article 6, paragraph (8) (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 87-4, or Article 88, paragraph (1) or paragraph (2)) or Article 7-3, paragraph (6) (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 87-2, or Article 88, paragraph (1));
三　第七条第二項若しくは第三項（これらの規定を第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第一項若しくは第二項において準用する場合を含む。）又は第七条の三第二項若しくは第三項（これらの規定を第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）の期限内に第七条第一項（第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第一項若しくは第二項において準用する場合を含む。）又は第七条の三第一項（第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による申請をせず、又は虚偽の申請をした者
(iii) a person who has not made an application or who has submitted a false application under the provisions of Article 7, paragraph (1) (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 87-4, or Article 88, paragraph (1) or paragraph (2)) or Article 7-3, paragraph (1) (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 87-2, or Article 88, paragraph (1)) within the time period under Article 7, paragraph (2) or (3) (including cases where these provisions are applied mutatis mutandis in Article 87-2, or Article 88, paragraph (1) or (2)) or Article 7-3, paragraph (2) or (3) (including cases where these provisions are applied mutatis mutandis in Article 87-2, or Article 88, paragraph (1));
四　第九条第十項後段（第八十八条第一項から第三項まで又は第九十条第三項において準用する場合を含む。）、第十条第二項若しくは第三項（これらの規定を第八十八条第一項又は第三項において準用する場合を含む。）、第十一条第一項（第八十八条第一項から第三項までにおいて準用する場合を含む。）又は第九十条の二第一項の規定による特定行政庁又は建築監視員の命令に違反した者
(iv) a person who has violated an order of the Designated Administrative Agency or building surveillant under the provisions of the latter part of Article 9, paragraph (10) (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 88, paragraphs (1) through (3) or in Article 90, paragraph (3)), Article 10, paragraph (2) or paragraph (3) (including cases where these provisions are applied mutatis mutandis in Article 88, paragraph (1) or (3)) and Article 11, paragraph (1) (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 88, paragraphs (1) through (3)), or Article 90-2, paragraph (1);
五　第十二条第五項（第一号に係る部分に限る。）又は第十五条の二第一項（これらの規定を第八十八条第一項から第三項までにおいて準用する場合を含む。）の規定による報告をせず、又は虚偽の報告をした者
(v) a person who has failed to report or as made a false report under Article 12, paragraph (5) (limited to parts relating to item (i)) or Article 15-2, paragraph (1) (including cases in which these provisions are applied to Article 88, paragraphs (1) through (3), mutatis mutandis);
六　第十二条第六項又は第十五条の二第一項（これらの規定を第八十八条第一項から第三項までにおいて準用する場合を含む。）の規定による物件の提出をせず、又は虚偽の物件の提出をした者
(vi) a person who has failed to submit objects or has submitted false objects under Article 12, paragraph (6) or Article 15-2, paragraph (1) (including cases in which these provisions are applied to Article 88, paragraphs (1) through (3), mutatis mutandis);
七　第十二条第七項又は第十五条の二第一項（これらの規定を第八十八条第一項から第三項までにおいて準用する場合を含む。）の規定による検査若しくは試験を拒み、妨げ、若しくは忌避し、又は質問に対して答弁せず、若しくは虚偽の答弁をした者
(vii) a person who has refused, prevented, or evaded inspections or testing under Article 12, paragraph (7) or Article 15-2, paragraph (1) (including cases in which these provisions are applied to Article 88, paragraphs (1) through (3), mutatis mutandis), or who has failed to respond to questions or provide false responses;
八　第二十条（第一項第四号に係る部分に限る。）、第二十二条第一項、第二十三条、第二十五条、第二十八条第三項、第二十八条の二（第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）、第三十二条（第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）、第三十三条（第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）、第三十四条第一項（第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）、第三十四条第二項、第三十五条の三、第三十七条（第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）、第六十一条、第六十二条、第六十四条、第六十七条第一項又は第八十八条第一項において準用する第二十条の規定に違反した場合における当該建築物、工作物又は建築設備の設計者（設計図書に記載された認定建築材料等の全部又は一部として当該認定建築材料等の全部又は一部と異なる建築材料又は建築物の部分を引き渡した場合においては当該建築材料又は建築物の部分を引き渡した者、設計図書を用いないで工事を施工し、又は設計図書に従わないで工事を施工した場合（設計図書に記載された認定建築材料等と異なる建築材料又は建築物の部分を引き渡された場合において、当該建築材料又は建築物の部分を使用して工事を施工した場合を除く。）においては当該建築物、工作物又は建築設備の工事施工者）
(viii) a person who has designed the relevant building, structure, or building equipment in violation of Article 20 (limited to parts relating to paragraph (1), item (iv)), Article 22, paragraph (1), Article 23, Article 25, Article 28, paragraph (3), Article 28-2 (including cases in which it is applied mutatis mutandis to Article 88, paragraph (1)), Article 32 (including cases in which it is applied mutatis mutandis to Article 88, paragraph (1)), Article 33 (including cases in which it is applied mutatis mutandis to Article 88, paragraph (1)), Article 34, paragraph (1) (including cases in which it is applied mutatis mutandis to Article 88 paragraph (1)), Article 34, paragraph (2), Article 35-3, Article 37 (including cases in which it is applied mutatis mutandis to Article 88 paragraph (1)), Article 61, Article 62, Article 64, Article 67, paragraph (1), or the provisions of Article 20 applied mutatis mutandis to Article 88, paragraph (1) (if building materials, etc., were delivered as all or part of approved building materials stated in the drawing/specifications but were partially or completely different from the relevant approved building materials, etc., the person who delivered the relevant building materials, etc., or the construction executor for the relevant building or building equipment if building work was performed without using the drawing/specifications or without complying with the drawing/specifications (except in cases in which building materials, etc., were delivered that were partially or completely different from the relevant approved building materials, etc., stated in the drawing/specifications and construction work was performed using the relevant building materials or parts);
九　第三十六条（消火設備、避雷設備及び給水、排水その他の配管設備の設置及び構造並びに煙突及び昇降機の構造に係る部分に限り、第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定に基づく政令の規定に違反した場合における当該建築物、工作物又は建築設備の設計者（設計図書に記載された認定建築材料等の全部又は一部として当該認定建築材料等の全部又は一部と異なる建築材料又は建築物の部分を引き渡した場合においては当該建築材料又は建築物の部分を引き渡した者、設計図書を用いないで工事を施工し、又は設計図書に従わないで工事を施工した場合（設計図書に記載された認定建築材料等と異なる建築材料又は建築物の部分を引き渡された場合において、当該建築材料又は建築物の部分を使用して工事を施工した場合を除く。）においては当該建築物、工作物又は建築設備の工事施工者）
(ix) a person who designed a building, structure, or building equipment in violation of Article 36 (limited to parts relating to the installation and construction of fire extinguishing equipment, lightning conductors, water supply and drainage, and other piping equipment; and to the construction of chimneys and elevatory systems; including cases in which Article 36 is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 88, paragraph (1)) (if building materials, etc., were delivered as all or part of approved building materials stated in the drawing/specifications but were partially or completely different from the relevant approved building materials, etc., the person who delivered the relevant building materials, etc., or the construction executor for the relevant building or building equipment if building work was performed without using the drawing/specifications or without complying with the drawing/specifications (except in cases in which building materials, etc., were delivered that were partially or completely different from the relevant approved building materials, etc., stated in the drawing/specifications and construction work was performed using the relevant building materials or parts);
十　第七十七条の八第一項（第七十七条の十七の二第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定に違反して、その職務に関して知り得た秘密を漏らした者
(x) a person who has revealed confidential information learned concerning that person's work in violation of the provisions of Article 77-8, paragraph (1) (including cases in which it applies mutatis mutandis to Article 77-17-2, paragraph (2));
十一　第七十七条の八第二項（第七十七条の十七の二第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定に違反して、事前に建築基準適合判定資格者検定若しくは構造計算適合判定資格者検定の問題を漏らし、又は不正の採点をした者
(xi) a person who has leaked questions in a qualification examination for qualified building regulation conformity inspectors or structural calculation conformity reviewers in advance or who has scored examination papers unfairly in violation of the provisions of Article 77-8, paragraph (2) (including cases in which it applies mutatis mutandis to Article 77-17-2, paragraph (2)). mutandis to Article 77-17-2, paragraph (2));
十二　第七十七条の二十五第一項、第七十七条の三十五の十第一項又は第七十七条の四十三第一項（第七十七条の五十六第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定に違反して、その職務に関して知り得た秘密を漏らし、又は盗用した者
(xii) a person who has revealed confidential information learned concerning that person's work or has used that confidential information for that person's own benefit in violation of the provisions of Article 77-25, paragraph (1), Article 77-35-10, paragraph (1), or Article 77-35-8, paragraph (1) or Article 77-43, paragraph (1) (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 77-56, paragraph (2));
十三　第七十七条の三十五第二項の規定による確認検査の業務の停止の命令に違反した者
(xiii) a person who has violated an order to suspend the confirmation and inspection work under Article 77-35, paragraph (2);
十四　第七十七条の六十二第二項（第七十七条の六十六第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による禁止に違反して、確認検査又は構造計算適合性判定の業務を行つた者
(xiv) a person who has performed confirmation and inspection work or structural calculation conformity review work in violation of a prohibition under Article 77-62, paragraph (2) (including cases in which it applies to the Article 77-66, paragraph (2) mutatis mutandis);
十五　第八十七条第三項において準用する第二十八条第三項又は第三十五条の三の規定に違反した場合における当該建築物の所有者、管理者又は占有者
(xv) the owner, custodian, or occupant of the relevant building in case of a violation of the provisions of Article 28, paragraph (3), or Article 35-3 applied mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (3);
十六　第八十七条第三項において準用する第三十六条（消火設備の設置及び構造に関して、第三十五条の規定を実施し、又は補足するために安全上及び防火上必要な技術的基準に係る部分に限る。）の規定に基づく政令の規定に違反した場合における当該建築物の所有者、管理者又は占有者
(xvi) the owner, custodian, or occupant of the relevant building in the case of a violation of provisions of Cabinet Order under the provisions of Article 36 applied mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (3) (limited to parts related to technical standards necessary for safety and fire protection in order to enforce or to supplement the provisions of Article 35 concerning the installation and construction of fire extinguishing equipment).
２　前項第八号又は第九号に規定する違反があつた場合において、その違反が建築主、工作物の築造主又は建築設備の設置者の故意によるものであるときは、当該設計者又は工事施工者を罰するほか、当該建築主、工作物の築造主又は建築設備の設置者に対して同項の刑を科する。
(2) When a violation of the provisions of item (viii) or (ix) of the preceding paragraph is a violation that has been made purposely by the building owner, structure owner, or installer of the building equipment, in addition to the penalization of the relevant designer or executor of construction work, the relevant building owner, structure owner, or installer of the building equipment shall be penalized under that paragraph.
第百条　第七十七条の十五第二項（第七十七条の十七の二第二項において準用する場合を含む。）、第七十七条の三十五の十九第二項又は第七十七条の五十一第二項（第七十七条の五十六第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務、構造計算適合判定資格者検定事務又は構造計算適合性判定、認定等若しくは性能評価の業務の停止の命令に違反したときは、その違反行為をした指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関若しくは指定構造計算適合判定資格者検定機関の役員若しくは職員（建築基準適合判定資格者検定委員及び構造計算適合判定資格者検定委員を含む。）又は指定構造計算適合性判定機関、指定認定機関若しくは指定性能評価機関（いずれもその者が法人である場合にあつては、その役員）若しくはその職員（構造計算適合性判定員、認定員及び評価員を含む。）（第百四条において「指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関等の役員等」という。）は、一年以下の懲役又は百万円以下の罰金に処する。
Article 100  If an order under Article 77-15, Article 2 (including cases in which it is applied mutatis mutandis to Article 77-17 paragraph (2), item (ii)), Article 77-35-19, paragraph (2) or Article 77-51, paragraph (2) (including cases in which it is applied mutatis mutandis to Article 77-56, paragraph (2)) to suspend the qualifying examination affairs for building regulation conformity inspectors or structural calculation conformity reviewers, structural calculation conformity review work, approvals, etc., or performance assessment work is violated, a penalty of imprisonment with forced labor for not more than one year, or a fine of not more than one million yen shall be imposed on the officer or employee including a qualified building regulation conformity inspector or qualified structural calculation conformity reviewer) of the designated qualifying examination body for building regulation conformity inspectors or structural calculation conformity reviewers, or the employee (including a structural calculation conformity reviewer, approver, or assessor) of the designated structural calculation conformity review body, designated approval body, or designated performance evaluation body (or if any of these bodies are corporations, an officer thereof) (referred to in Article 104 as "officers, etc., of designated qualifying examination bodies for building regulation conformity inspectors or structural calculation conformity reviewers, etc.) that committed the relevant violation.
第百一条　次の各号のいずれかに該当する者は、百万円以下の罰金に処する。
Article 101  (1) Any person coming under any of the following items shall be punished with a fine not more than one million yen:
一　第五条の六第一項から第三項まで又は第五項の規定に違反した場合における当該建築物の工事施工者
(i) the executor of construction work on a building which is in violation of the provisions of Article 5-6, paragraphs (1) through (3) or paragraph (5);
二　第十二条第一項若しくは第三項（これらの規定を第八十八条第一項又は第三項において準用する場合を含む。）又は第五項（第二号に係る部分に限り、第八十八条第一項から第三項までにおいて準用する場合を含む。）の規定による報告をせず、又は虚偽の報告をした者
(ii) any person who has not issued a report or has issued a false report under the provisions of Article 12, paragraph (1) or (3) (including cases where these provisions apply mutatis mutandis in Article 88, paragraph (1) or paragraph (3)), or failed to report or has made a false report under Article 5 (limited to parts relating to item (ii), including cases in which it applies mutatis mutandis to Article 88, paragraphs (1) through (3));
三　第十九条、第二十八条第一項若しくは第二項、第三十一条、第四十三条第一項、第四十四条第一項、第四十七条、第五十二条第一項、第二項若しくは第七項、第五十三条第一項若しくは第二項、第五十三条の二第一項（第五十七条の五第三項において準用する場合を含む。）、第五十四条第一項、第五十五条第一項、第五十六条第一項、第五十六条の二第一項、第五十七条の四第一項、第五十七条の五第一項、第五十九条第一項若しくは第二項、第六十条第一項若しくは第二項、第六十条の二第一項若しくは第二項、第六十条の二の二第一項から第三項まで、第六十条の三第一項若しくは第二項、第六十七条第三項若しくは第五項から第七項まで又は第六十八条第一項から第三項までの規定に違反した場合における当該建築物又は建築設備の設計者（設計図書に記載された認定建築材料等の全部又は一部として当該認定建築材料等の全部又は一部と異なる建築材料又は建築物の部分を引き渡した場合においては当該建築材料又は建築物の部分を引き渡した者、設計図書を用いないで工事を施工し、又は設計図書に従わないで工事を施工した場合（設計図書に記載された認定建築材料等と異なる建築材料又は建築物の部分を引き渡された場合において、当該建築材料又は建築物の部分を使用して工事を施工した場合を除く。）においては当該建築物又は建築設備の工事施工者）
(iii) the designer (or the executor of construction work on a building, or building equipment if the construction work has been executed without using drawings/specifications or has been undertaken without conforming to the drawings/specifications concerned) of a building, structure or building equipment which is in violation of the provisions of Article 19, Article 28, paragraph (1) or (2), Article 31, Article 43, paragraph (1), Article 44, paragraph (1), Article 47, Article 52, paragraph (1), (2) or (7), Article 53, paragraph (1) or (2), Article 53-2, paragraph (1) (including cases where this Article applies mutatis mutandis in Article 57-5, paragraph (3)), Article 54, paragraph (1), Article 55, paragraph (1), Article 56, paragraph (1), Article 56-2, paragraph (1), Article 57-4, paragraph (1), Article 57-5, paragraph (1) Article 59, paragraph (1) or 2, Article 60, paragraph (1) or (2), Article 60-2, paragraph (1) or (2), Article 60-2-2, paragraphs (1) through (3), Article 60-3, paragraph (1), Article 67, paragraph (3) or paragraphs (5) through (7) or Article 68, paragraphs (1) through (3). The person who designed the relevant building or building equipment in violation of Article 19, Article 28, paragraph (1) or (2), Article 31, Article 43, paragraph (1), Article 44, paragraph (1), Article 47, Article 52, paragraph (1), (2) or (7) , Article 53, paragraph (1) or (2), Article 53-2, paragraph (1) (including cases where this Article applies mutatis mutandis to Article 57-5, paragraph (3)), Article 54, paragraph (1), Article 55, paragraph (1), Article 56, paragraph (1), Article 56-2, paragraph (1), Article 57-4, paragraph (1), Article 57-5, paragraph (1) Article 59, paragraph (1) or (2), Article 60, paragraph (1) or (2), Article 60-2, paragraph (1) or (2), Article 60-3, paragraph (1) or 2, Article 67-3, paragraph (3) or paragraphs (5) through (7) or Article 68, paragraphs (1) through (3) (if building materials, etc., were delivered as all or part of approved building materials stated in the drawing/specifications but were partially or completely different from the relevant approved building materials, etc., the person who delivered the relevant building materials, etc., or the construction executor for the relevant building or building equipment if building work was performed without using the drawing/specifications or without complying with the drawing/specifications (except in cases in which building materials, etc., were delivered that were partially or completely different from the relevant approved building materials, etc., stated in the drawing/specifications and construction work was performed using the relevant building materials or parts);
四　第三十六条（居室の採光面積、天井及び床の高さ、床の防湿方法、階段の構造、便所の設置及び構造並びに浄化槽の構造に係る部分に限る。）の規定に基づく政令の規定に違反した場合における当該建築物又は建築設備の設計者（設計図書に記載された認定建築材料等の全部又は一部として当該認定建築材料等の全部又は一部と異なる建築材料又は建築物の部分を引き渡した場合においては当該建築材料又は建築物の部分を引き渡した者、設計図書を用いないで工事を施工し、又は設計図書に従わないで工事を施工した場合（設計図書に記載された認定建築材料等と異なる建築材料又は建築物の部分を引き渡された場合において、当該建築材料又は建築物の部分を使用して工事を施工した場合を除く。）においては当該建築物又は建築設備の工事施工者）
(iv) the person who designed the relevant building in violation of the provisions of Cabinet Order based on the provisions of Article 36 (limited to parts concerning areas effective for natural lighting in habitable rooms, heights of ceilings and floors, methods of damp proofing floors, construction of stairways, installation and construction of toilets, and construction of wastewater purifier) (if building materials, etc., were delivered as all or part of approved building materials stated in the drawing/specifications but were partially or completely different from the relevant approved building materials, etc., the person who delivered the relevant building materials, etc., or the construction executor for the relevant building or building equipment if building work was performed without using the drawing/specifications or without complying with the drawing/specifications (except in cases in which building materials, etc., were delivered that were partially or completely different from the relevant approved building materials, etc., stated in the drawing/specifications and construction work was performed using the relevant building materials or parts);
五　第四十八条第一項から第十四項まで又は第五十一条（これらの規定を第八十八条第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定に違反した場合における当該建築物又は工作物の建築主又は築造主
(v) the building owner of a building or owner of a structure which is in violation of the provisions of Article 48, paragraphs (1) through (14) or Article 51 (including cases where these provisions apply mutatis mutandis in Article 88, paragraph (2));
六　第五十八条の規定による制限に違反した場合における当該建築物の設計者（設計図書を用いないで工事を施工し、又は設計図書に従わないで工事を施工した場合においては、当該建築物の工事施工者）
(vi) the designer (or the executor of construction work if the construction work has been executed without using drawings/specifications or has been undertaken without conforming to the drawings/specifications concerned) of a building which is in violation of the restriction under Article 58;
七　第六十八条の十八第二項（第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定に違反して、検査を行わず、検査記録を作成せず、虚偽の検査記録を作成し、又は検査記録を保存しなかつた者
(vii) a person who has failed to perform an inspection, failed to prepare an inspection record, has prepared a false inspection record, or who has failed to maintain an inspection record in violation of the provision of Article 68-18, paragraph (2) (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 88, paragraph (1));
八　第八十五条第三項の規定に違反した場合における当該建築物の建築主
(viii) the building owner of a building which is in violation of the provisions of Article 85, paragraph (3);
九　第八十五条第四項の規定により特定行政庁が定めた期間を超えて応急仮設建築物を存続させた場合における当該建築物の所有者、管理者又は占有者
(ix) the owner, custodian, or occupant of a temporary building for emergency use when the relevant building has been used in excess of the temporary period specified by the Designated Administrative Agency pursuant to the provisions of Article 85, paragraph (4);
十　第八十五条第五項又は第六項の規定により特定行政庁が定めた期間を超えて仮設興行場等を存続させた場合における当該建築物の所有者、管理者又は占有者
(x) the owner, custodian, or occupant of a temporary playhouse, etc. when the relevant building has been used in excess of the temporary period specified by the Designated Administrative Agency pursuant to the provisions of Article 85, paragraph (5) or (6);
十一　第八十四条第一項の規定による制限又は禁止に違反した場合における当該建築物の建築主
(xi) the building owner of a building which is in violation of the restriction or prohibition under Article 84 paragraph (1);
十二　第八十七条第二項又は第三項において準用する第二十八条第一項、第四十八条第一項から第十四項まで又は第五十一条の規定に違反した場合における当該建築物の所有者、管理者又は占有者
(xii) the owner, custodian or occupant of a building which is in violation of the provisions of Article 28, paragraph (1), Article 48, paragraphs (1) through (13) or Article 51, which apply mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (2) or (3);
十三　第八十八条第二項において準用する第八十七条第二項又は第三項において準用する第四十八条第一項から第十四項まで又は第五十一条の規定に違反した場合における当該工作物の所有者、管理者又は占有者
(xiii) the owner, custodian or occupant of a structure which is in violation of the provisions of Article 48, paragraphs (1) through (14) or Article 51 applied mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (2) or (3) applied mutatis mutandis in Article 88, paragraph (2);
十四　第八十七条第三項において準用する第三十六条（居室の採光面積及び階段の構造に関して、第二十八条第一項又は第三十五条の規定を実施し、又は補足するために安全上、防火上及び衛生上必要な技術的基準に係る部分に限る。）の規定に基づく政令の規定に違反した場合における当該建築物の所有者、管理者又は占有者
(xiv) the owner, custodian or occupant of a building which is in violation of the provisions of Cabinet Order under the provisions of Article 36 applied mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (3) (limited to parts concerning technical criteria necessary for safety, fire protection, and sanitation in order to enforce or to supplement the provisions of Article 28, paragraph (1) or Article 35 concerning the area effective for natural lighting in habitable rooms, and the construction of stairways);
十五　第八十七条の三第三項の規定に違反した場合における当該建築物の所有者、管理者又は占有者
(xv) the owner, custodian, or occupant of the relevant building in the case of a violation of the provisions of Article 87-3, paragraph (3);
十六　第八十七条の三第四項の規定により特定行政庁が定めた期間を超えて当該建築物を災害救助用建築物又は公益的建築物として使用した場合における当該建築物の所有者、管理者又は占有者
(xvi) the owner, custodian, or occupant of the relevant building when the relevant building has been used as a building for disaster rescue or a building for the public interest in excess of the temporary period specified by the Designated Administrative Agency pursuant to the provisions of Article 87-3, paragraph (4);
十七　第八十七条の三第五項又は第六項の規定により特定行政庁が定めた期間を超えて当該建築物を興行場等として使用した場合における当該建築物の所有者、管理者又は占有者
(xvii) the owner, custodian, or occupant of the relevant building when the relevant building has been used as the playhouse, etc. in excess of the temporary period specified by the Designated Administrative Agency pursuant to the provisions of Article 87-3, paragraph (5) or (6);
十八　第九十条第一項（第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定に違反した者
(xviii) a person who has violated the provisions of Article 90, paragraph (1) (including cases where they apply mutatis mutandis in Article 87-4 or Article 88, paragraph (1)).
２　前項第三号、第四号又は第六号に規定する違反があつた場合において、その違反が建築主又は建築設備の設置者の故意によるものであるときは、当該設計者又は工事施工者を罰するほか、当該建築主又は建築設備の設置者に対して同項の刑を科する。
(2) If a violation as specified in item (iii), (iv) or (vi) of the preceding paragraph has been found and that violation has been made purposely by a building owner or person who has had building equipment installed, a penalty as specified in that paragraph shall be imposed on the relevant building owner or person who has had the building equipment installed in addition to any penalty imposed on the designer or executor of construction work concerned.
第百二条　第十二条第五項（第三号に係る部分に限る。）の規定による報告をせず、又は虚偽の報告をしたときは、その違反行為をした指定構造計算適合性判定機関（その者が法人である場合にあつては、その役員）又はその職員（構造計算適合性判定員を含む。）は、百万円以下の罰金に処する。
Article 102  A fine not exceeding one million yen shall be imposed on a designated structural calculation conformity review body (if the body is a corporation, an officer thereof) or employee thereof (including a structural calculation conformity reviewer) that fails to report under Article 12, paragraph (5) (limited to parts relating to item (iii)) or makes a false report.
第百三条　次の各号のいずれかに該当する者は、五十万円以下の罰金に処する。
Article 103  Any person coming under any of the following items shall be punished with a fine of not more than five hundred thousand yen:
一　第六条の二第五項（第八十七条第一項、第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第一項若しくは第二項において準用する場合を含む。）、第七条の二第六項（第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第一項若しくは第二項において準用する場合を含む。）、第七条の四第六項（第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）又は第七条の六第三項（第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第一項若しくは第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による報告書若しくは添付書類の提出をせず、又は虚偽の報告書若しくは添付書類の提出をした者
(i) a person who has failed to submit reports or accompanying documents under Article 6-2, paragraph (5) (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (1), Article 87-4 or Article 88, paragraph (1) or (2)), Article 7-2, paragraph (6) (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 87-4, Article 88, paragraph (1) or (2)) or Article 7-6, paragraph (3) (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis to Article 87-2, or Article 88, paragraph (1) or (2) or who has submitted false reports or accompanying documents;
二　第十五条第一項の規定又は第八十七条第一項において読み替えて準用する第七条第一項の規定による届出をせず、又は虚偽の届出をした者
(ii) a person who has failed to notify under Article 15, paragraph (1) or under Article 7, paragraph (1) that is applied mutatis mutandis by replacing phrases therein in Article 87, paragraph (1) or who has submitted a false notification;
三　第七十七条の二十九第二項又は第八十九条（第八十七条の四又は第八十八条第一項若しくは第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定に違反した者
(iii) a person who has violated the provisions of Article 77-29, paragraph (2) or Article 89 (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 87-4 or Article 88, paragraph (1) or (2);
四　第七十七条の三十一第一項又は第八十六条の八第四項（第八十七条の二第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による報告をせず、又は虚偽の報告をした者
(iv) a person who has failed to submit a report under Article 77-31, paragraph (1) or Article 86-8, paragraph (4) (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 87-2, paragraph (2)), or who has submitted a false report;
五　第七十七条の三十一第一項又は第二項の規定による検査を拒み、妨げ、又は忌避した者
(v) a person who has refused, obstructed, or evaded inspection or examination under Article 77-31, paragraph (1) or (2);
六　第七十七条の三十一第一項又は第二項の規定による質問に対して答弁せず、又は虚偽の答弁をした者
(vi) a person who has refused to answer questions asked under Article 77-31, paragraph (1) or (2), or who has given false answers;
七　第七十七条の二十九第一項の規定に違反して、帳簿を備え付けず、帳簿に記載せず、若しくは帳簿に虚偽の記載をし、又は帳簿を保存しなかつた者
(vii) a person who has failed to keep a book, has failed to record information, has recorded false information, or who has failed to maintain the book in violation of the provisions of Article 77-29, paragraph (1);
八　第七十七条の三十四第一項の規定による届出をしないで確認検査の業務の全部を廃止し、又は虚偽の届出をした者
(viii) a person who has abandoned all of the confirmation and inspection work without submitting the notification under Article 77-34, paragraph (1), or who has submitted a false notification.
第百四条　次の各号のいずれかに該当するときは、その違反行為をした指定建築基準適合判定資格者検定機関等の役員等は、五十万円以下の罰金に処する。
Article 104  When any action in any of the following items has occurred, the executives, etc., of the examination body for qualified Building Regulation Conformity Inspectors, etc., etc., that committed this violation shall be punished by a fine of no more than five hundred thousand yen.
一　第七十七条の十三第一項（第七十七条の十七の二第二項において準用する場合を含む。）、第七十七条の三十五の十七第一項又は第七十七条の四十九第一項（第七十七条の五十六第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による報告をせず、又は虚偽の報告をしたとき。
(i) when a report has not been submitted under Article 77-13, paragraph (1) (including cases in which it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 77-17-2, paragraph (2)), Article 77-35-17, paragraph (1), or Article 77-49, paragraph (1) (including cases in which it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 77-56, paragraph (2)) or a false report has been submitted;
二　第七十七条の十一（第七十七条の十七の二第二項において準用する場合を含む。）、第七十七条の三十五の十四第一項又は第七十七条の四十七第一項（第七十七条の五十六第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定に違反して、帳簿を備え付けず、帳簿に記載せず、若しくは帳簿に虚偽の記載をし、又は帳簿を保存しなかつたとき。
(ii) when a ledger has not been provided, entries have not been made, false entries have made, or the ledger has not been retained in violation of Article 77-11 (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 77-17-2 paragraph (2)), Article 77-35-14, paragraph (1), or Article 77-47, paragraph (1) (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 77-56, paragraph (2));
三　第七十七条の十三第一項（第七十七条の十七の二第二項において準用する場合を含む。）、第七十七条の三十五の十七第一項又は第七十七条の四十九第一項（第七十七条の五十六第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による検査を拒み、妨げ、若しくは忌避し、又は質問に対して答弁せず、若しくは虚偽の答弁をしたとき。
(iii) when an examination under Article 77-13, paragraph (1), (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 77-17-2, paragraph (2)), Article 77-35-17, paragraph (1), or Article 77-49, paragraph (1) (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 77-56, paragraph (2)) has been refused, obstructed or evaded, questions have not been answered, or questions have been answered falsely;
四　第七十七条の十四第一項（第七十七条の十七の二第二項において準用する場合を含む。）、第七十七条の三十五の十八第一項又は第七十七条の五十第一項（第七十七条の五十六第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の許可を受けないで建築基準適合判定資格者検定事務、構造計算適合判定資格者検定事務又は構造計算適合性判定、認定等若しくは性能評価の業務の全部を廃止したとき。
(iv) when all qualification examination work for building regulation conformity inspectors or structural calculation conformity reviewers, structural calculation conformity review, approval, or performance evaluation work has been abandoned without authorization under Article 77-14, paragraph (1) (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 77-17-2, paragraph (2)), Article 77-35-18 paragraph (1), or Article 77-35-13, paragraph (1) or Article 77-50, paragraph (1) (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 77-56, paragraph (2));
五　第七十七条の三十五の十四第二項又は第七十七条の四十七第二項（第七十七条の五十六第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定に違反したとき。
(v) when a violation of the provisions of Article 77-35-10, paragraph (2) or Article 77-47, paragraph (2) (including cases where it is applied mutatis mutandis in Article 77-56, paragraph (2)) has been committed.
第百五条　法人の代表者又は法人若しくは人の代理人、使用人その他の従業者がその法人又は人の業務に関して、次の各号に掲げる規定の違反行為をした場合においては、その行為者を罰するほか、その法人に対して当該各号に定める罰金刑を、その人に対して各本条の罰金刑を科する。
Article 105  If the representative of a corporation, or agent, employee or other worker of a corporation or an individual, has committed an act in violation of any of the following provisions in connection with the business of the corporation or the individual, in addition to the punishment of that offender, corporation shall be punished by the fine prescribed in each of the relevant items, and the individual shall be punished by fine prescribed in each of those Articles.
一　第九十八条第一項第一号（第十九条第四項、第二十条、第二十一条、第二十二条第一項、第二十三条、第二十五条から第二十七条まで、第二十八条第三項、第二十八条の二、第三十二条から第三十五条の三まで、第三十六条（防火壁、防火床、防火区画、消火設備、避雷設備及び給水、排水その他の配管設備の設置及び構造並びに煙突及び昇降機の構造に係る部分に限る。）、第三十七条、第六十一条、第六十二条、第六十四条又は第六十七条第一項、第三項若しくは第五項から第七項までの規定に違反する特殊建築物等（第六条第一項第一号に掲げる建築物その他多数の者が利用するものとして政令で定める建築物をいう。以下この条において同じ。）又は当該特殊建築物等の敷地に関してされた第九条第一項又は第十項前段（これらの規定を第九十条第三項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による命令の違反に係る部分に限る。）、第九十八条（第一項第一号を除き、特殊建築物等に係る部分に限る。）並びに第九十九条第一項第八号、第九号、第十五号及び第十六号並びに第二項（特殊建築物等に係る部分に限る。）　一億円以下の罰金刑
(i) article 98, paragraph (1), item (i) (limited to parts concerning a violation under Article 9, paragraph (1) or the first half of paragraph (10) (including cases where its provisions are applied mutatis mutandis in Article 90, paragraph (3)) that was issued concerning a special building etc. (building set forth in Article 6, paragraph (1), item (i) or other building specified by Cabinet Order as a building used by many people; the same hereafter in this Article) or the building site of the relevant special building that violates the provisions of Article 19, paragraph (4), Article 20, Article 21, Article 22, paragraph (1), Article 23, Article 25 to Article 27, Article 28 paragraph (3), Article 28-2, Article 32 to Article 35-3, Article 36 (limited to parts concerning the installation and construction of fire walls, fire floors, fire compartment, fire extinguishing equipment, lightning conductors, water supply, drainage and other piping equipment, and the construction of chimneys and elevatory system), Article 37, Article 61, Article 62, Article 64 or Article 67, paragraph (1), paragraph (3), or paragraphs (5) through (7), Article 98 (excluding paragraph (1), item (i), and limited to parts concerning the special building etc.), and Article 99, paragraph (1), items (viii), (ix), (xv) and (xvi), and paragraph (2) (limited to parts related to special building etc.): a fine of no more than one hundred million yen;
二　第九十八条（前号に係る部分を除く。）、第九十九条第一項第一号から第七号まで、第八号及び第九号（特殊建築物等に係る部分を除く。）、第十二号（第七十七条の二十五第一項に係る部分に限る。）、第十三号、第十四号並びに第十五号及び第十六号（特殊建築物等に係る部分を除く。）並びに第二項（特殊建築物等に係る部分を除く。）、第百一条並びに第百三条　各本条の罰金刑
(ii) article 98 (excluding parts concerning the preceding item), Article 99, paragraph (1), items (i) through (vii), items (viii) and (ix) (excluding parts concerning special buildings etc.) item (xii) (limited to parts concerning Article 77-25, paragraph (1)), items (xiii), (xiv), (xv) and (xvi) (excluding parts related to special buildings etc.), and paragraph (2) (excluding parts related to special buildings etc.), Article 101, and Article 103: fine in each Article.
第百六条　次の各号のいずれかに該当する者は、三十万円以下の過料に処する。
Article 106  (1) A person coming under any of the following items shall be penalized by a fine of no more than three hundred thousand yen:
一　第十二条の二第三項（第十二条の三第四項（第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）又は第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による命令に違反した者
(i) a person who has violated under Article 12-2, paragraph (3) (including cases in which it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 12-3, paragraph (4) (including cases in which it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 88, paragraph (1)) or Article 88, paragraph (1));
二　第六十八条の十六若しくは第六十八条の十七第一項（これらの規定を第八十八条第一項において準用する場合を含む。）又は第七十七条の六十一（第三号を除き、第七十七条の六十六第二項において準用する場合を含む。）の規定による届出をせず、又は虚偽の届出をした者
(ii) a person who has failed to make a notification or has made a false notification under Article 68-16 or Article 68-17, paragraph (1) (including cases where these provisions are applied mutatis mutandis in Article 88, paragraph (1)) or Article 77-61 (including cases where these provisions are applied mutatis mutandis in Article 77-66, paragraph (2) except in item (iii);
三　第七十七条の二十九の二の規定に違反して、書類を備え置かず、若しくは関係者の求めに応じて閲覧させず、又は書類に虚偽の記載をし、若しくは虚偽の記載のある書類を関係者に閲覧させた者
(iii) a person who, in violation of the provisions of Article 77-29-2, has not prepared documents, not provided them for perusal in response to a request by a concerned person, or who has entered false entries in the documents or who has shown documents with false entries to a concerned person.
２　第七十七条の三十五の十五の規定に違反して、書類を備え置かず、若しくは関係者の求めに応じて閲覧させず、又は書類に虚偽の記載をし、若しくは虚偽の記載のある書類を関係者に閲覧させた指定構造計算適合性判定機関（その者が法人である場合にあつては、その役員）又はその職員は、三十万円以下の過料に処する。
(2) A designated structural calculation conformity review body (if the body is a corporation, an officer thereof) or an employee thereof that in violation of the provisions of Article 77-35-15 fails to provide documents or make them available for perusal at the request of a concerned person, or records falsified information in documents, or causes a concerned person to peruse documents containing falsified information shall be penalized by fine not exceeding three hundred thousand yen.
第百七条　第三十九条第二項、第四十条若しくは第四十三条第三項（これらの規定を第八十七条第二項において準用する場合を含む。）、第四十三条の二（第八十七条第二項において準用する場合を含む。）、第四十九条第一項（第八十七条第二項又は第八十八条第二項において準用する場合を含む。）、第四十九条の二（第八十七条第二項又は第八十八条第二項において準用する場合を含む。）、第五十条（第八十七条第二項又は第八十八条第二項において準用する場合を含む。）、第六十八条の二第一項（第八十七条第二項又は第八十八条第二項において準用する場合を含む。）、第六十八条の九第一項（第八十七条第二項において準用する場合を含む。）又は第六十八条の九第二項の規定に基づく条例には、これに違反した者に対し、五十万円以下の罰金に処する旨の規定を設けることができる。
Article 107  It shall be possible to establish provisions stipulating that a penalty of up to five hundred thousand yen be imposed on persons who contravene an ordinance based on the provisions of Article 39, paragraph (2), Article 40 or Article 43, paragraph (3) (including cases where these provisions apply mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (2)), Article 43-2 (including cases where these provisions apply mutates mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (2)), Article 49, paragraph (1) (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (2) or Article 88, paragraph (2)), Article 49-2, (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (2) or Article 88, paragraph (2)), Article 50 (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (2) or Article 88, paragraph (2)), Article 68-2, paragraph (1) (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (2) or Article 88, paragraph (2)), Article 68-9, paragraph (1) (including cases where it applies mutatis mutandis in Article 87, paragraph (2)) or Article 68-9, paragraph (2).
別表第一　耐火建築物等としなければならない特殊建築物　（第六条、第二十一条、第二十七条、第二十八条、第三十五条―第三十五条の三、第九十条の三関係）
Appended Table 1 Special Buildings that must be Fire-resistive or Quasi Fire-resistive Buildings, etc. (Re: Article 6, Article 21, Article 27, Article 28, Articles 35 through 35-3 and Article 90-3)
||（い）|（ろ）|（は）|（に）|
||(a)|(b)|(c)|(d)|
||用途|（い）欄の用途に供する階|（い）欄の用途に供する部分（（一）項の場合にあつては客席、（二）項及び（四）項の場合にあつては二階、（五）項の場合にあつては三階以上の部分に限り、かつ、病院及び診療所についてはその部分に患者の収容施設がある場合に限る。）の床面積の合計|（い）欄の用途に供する部分の床面積の合計|
||Use|Floors for use as mentioned in (a)|Aggregate of floor areas of the parts for use as mentioned in (a) (limited to the seating space in the case of paragraph (1), to the second floor in the case of paragraphs (2) and (4), to the third or higher floors in the case of paragraph (5), and to facilities for the accommodation of patients in the case of hospitals and clinics)|Aggregate of floor areas of the parts for use as mentioned in (a)|
|（一）|劇場、映画館、演芸場、観覧場、公会堂、集会場その他これらに類するもので政令で定めるもの|三階以上の階|二百平方メートル（屋外観覧席にあつては、千平方メートル）以上||
|(1)|Theaters, movie theaters, entertainment halls, grand-stands, public halls, assembly halls, or others similar thereto as specified by Cabinet Order|Third or higher floors|200 sq m or more (in the case of open air stand 1,000 sq m or more)||
|（二）|病院、診療所（患者の収容施設があるものに限る。）、ホテル、旅館、下宿、共同住宅、寄宿舎その他これらに類するもので政令で定めるもの|三階以上の階|三百平方メートル以上||
|(2)|Hospitals, clinics (limited to those having patient accommodation facilities), hotels/inns, boarding houses, apartment houses, dormitories, or others similar thereto as specified by Cabinet Order|Third or higher floors|300 sq m or more||
|（三）|学校、体育館その他これらに類するもので政令で定めるもの|三階以上の階|二千平方メートル以上||
|(3)|Schools, gymnasia, or others similar thereto as specified by Cabinet Order|Third or higher floors|2,000 sq m or more||
|（四）|百貨店、マーケット、展示場、キャバレー、カフェー、ナイトクラブ、バー、ダンスホール、遊技場その他これらに類するもので政令で定めるもの|三階以上の階|五百平方メートル以上||
|(4)|Department stores, markets, exhibition halls, cabarets, cafes, night clubs, bars, dance halls, amusement halls, or others similar thereto as specified by Cabinet Order|Third or higher floors|500 sq m or more||
|（五）|倉庫その他これに類するもので政令で定めるもの||二百平方メートル以上|千五百平方メートル以上|
|(5)|Warehouses or others similar thereto as specified by Cabinet Order||200 sq m or more|1,500 sq m or more|
|（六）|自動車車庫、自動車修理工場その他これらに類するもので政令で定めるもの|三階以上の階||百五十平方メートル以上|
|(6)|Automobile garages, automobile repair shops, or others similar thereto as specified by Cabinet Order|Third or higher floors||150 sq m or more|
別表第二　用途地域等内の建築物の制限　（第二十七条、第四十八条、第六十八条の三関係）
Appended Table 2 Building Restrictions within Use Districts, etc. (Re: Article 27, Article 48 and Article 68-3)
|（い）|第一種低層住居専用地域内に建築することができる建築物|一　住宅|
|(a)|Buildings that may be built in Category 1 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts|(i) Houses|
|二　住宅で事務所、店舗その他これらに類する用途を兼ねるもののうち政令で定めるもの|
|(ii) Houses which are concurrently used as business offices, stores, or others similar thereto as specified by Cabinet Order|
|三　共同住宅、寄宿舎又は下宿|
|(iii) Apartment houses, dormitories, or boarding houses|
|四　学校（大学、高等専門学校、専修学校及び各種学校を除く。）、図書館その他これらに類するもの|
|(iv) Schools (excluding universities, colleges of technology, special training colleges, and miscellaneous schools), libraries, or others similar thereto|
|五　神社、寺院、教会その他これらに類するもの|
|(v) Shrines, temples, churches, or others similar thereto|
|六　老人ホーム、保育所、福祉ホームその他これらに類するもの|
|(vi) Nursing homes for the elderly, day nurseries, welfare homes, or others similar thereto|
|七　公衆浴場（風俗営業等の規制及び業務の適正化等に関する法律（昭和二十三年法律第百二十二号）第二条第六項第一号に該当する営業（以下この表において「個室付浴場業」という。）に係るものを除く。）|
|(vii) Public bathhouses (excluding those pertaining to businesses coming under Article 2, paragraph (6), item (i) of the Act on Control and Improvement of Amusement Business (Act No. 122 of 1948) (hereinafter referred to as "bathhouses with private rooms" in this table))|
|八　診療所|
|(viii) Clinics|
|九　巡査派出所、公衆電話所その他これらに類する政令で定める公益上必要な建築物|
|(ix) Police boxes, public telephone boxes, or other buildings necessary for the public interest as specified by Cabinet Order|
|十　前各号の建築物に附属するもの（政令で定めるものを除く。）|
|(x) Those annexed to buildings coming under any of the preceding items (excluding those specified by Cabinet Order)|
|（ろ）|第二種低層住居専用地域内に建築することができる建築物|一　（い）項第一号から第九号までに掲げるもの|
|(b)|Buildings that may be built in Category 2 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts|(i) Those mentioned in paragraph (a), items (i) through (ix)|
|二　店舗、飲食店その他これらに類する用途に供するもののうち政令で定めるものでその用途に供する部分の床面積の合計が百五十平方メートル以内のもの（三階以上の部分をその用途に供するものを除く。）|
|(ii) 	Those offered for use as stores, dining facilities, or other purposes similar thereto as specified by Cabinet Order, and where the total floor area offered for these purposes is 150 square meters or less (excluding buildings whose third floor and above are offered for these uses)|
|三　前二号の建築物に附属するもの（政令で定めるものを除く。）|
|(iii) 	Those annexed to buildings coming under either of the preceding two items (excluding those specified by Cabinet Order)|
|（は）|第一種中高層住居専用地域内に建築することができる建築物|一　（い）項第一号から第九号までに掲げるもの|
|(c)|Buildings that may be built in Category 1 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts|(i) Those mentioned in paragraph (a), items (i) through (ix)|
|二　大学、高等専門学校、専修学校その他これらに類するもの|
|(ii) 	Universities, colleges of technology, training colleges, or others similar thereto|
|三　病院|
|(iii) 	Hospitals|
|四　老人福祉センター、児童厚生施設その他これらに類するもの|
|(iv) 	Welfare centers for the elderly, children's recreational facilities, and others similar thereto|
|五　店舗、飲食店その他これらに類する用途に供するもののうち政令で定めるものでその用途に供する部分の床面積の合計が五百平方メートル以内のもの（三階以上の部分をその用途に供するものを除く。）|
|(v) 	Those offered for use as stores, dining facilities, or other purposes similar thereto as specified by Cabinet Order, and where the aggregate floor areas offered for these purposes is (v) 00 square meters or less (excluding buildings whose third floor and above are offered for these uses)|
|六　自動車車庫で床面積の合計が三百平方メートル以内のもの又は都市計画として決定されたもの（三階以上の部分をその用途に供するものを除く。）|
|(vi) 	Automobile garages with the aggregate floor areas of 300 square meters or less, or specified in city planning (excluding buildings whose third floor and above are offered for this use)|
|七　公益上必要な建築物で政令で定めるもの|
|(vii) 	Those necessary for the public interest and specified by Cabinet Order|
|八　前各号の建築物に附属するもの（政令で定めるものを除く。）|
|(viii) 	Those annexed to buildings coming under any of the preceding items (excluding those specified by Cabinet Order)|
|（に）|第二種中高層住居専用地域内に建築してはならない建築物|一　（ほ）項第二号及び第三号、（へ）項第三号から第五号まで、（と）項第四号並びに（り）項第二号及び第三号に掲げるもの|
|(d)|Buildings that must not be built in Category 2 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts|(i) Those mentioned in paragraph (e), items (ii) and (iii); paragraph (f), items (iii) through (v); paragraph (g), item (iv); and paragraph (h), items (ii) and (iii)|
|二　工場（政令で定めるものを除く。）|
|(ii) 	Factories (excluding those specified by Cabinet Order)|
|三　ボーリング場、スケート場、水泳場その他これらに類する政令で定める運動施設|
|(iii) 	Bowling alleys, skating rinks, swimming pools, and other similar athletic facilities specified by Cabinet Order|
|四　ホテル又は旅館|
|(iv) 	Hotels/inns|
|五　自動車教習所|
|(v) 	Driving schools|
|六　政令で定める規模の畜舎|
|(vi) 	Livestock sheds of a scale as specified by Cabinet Order|
|七　三階以上の部分を（は）項に掲げる建築物以外の建築物の用途に供するもの（政令で定めるものを除く。）|
|(vii) 	Buildings in which the third and higher floors are offered for a use other than those mentioned in paragraph (c) (excluding those specified by Cabinet Order)|
|八　（は）項に掲げる建築物以外の建築物の用途に供するものでその用途に供する部分の床面積の合計が千五百平方メートルを超えるもの（政令で定めるものを除く。）|
|(viii) 	Buildings offered for uses other than those mentioned in (c) in which the aggregate floor areas offered for this purpose exceeds 1,500 square meters (excluding those specified by Cabinet Order)|
|（ほ）|第一種住居地域内に建築してはならない建築物|一　（へ）項第一号から第五号までに掲げるもの|
|(e)|Buildings that must not be built in Category 1 Residential Districts|(i) Those mentioned in paragraph (f), items (i) through (v)|
|二　マージャン屋、ぱちんこ屋、射的場、勝馬投票券発売所、場外車券売場その他これらに類するもの|
|(ii) 	Mah-jongg parlors, pachinko halls, shooting galleries,  betting windows (horse racing), off-track betting windows (bicycle racing or motersycle racing), and others similar thereto|
|三　カラオケボックスその他これに類するもの|
|(iii) 	Karaoke boxes and others similar thereto|
|四　（は）項に掲げる建築物以外の建築物の用途に供するものでその用途に供する部分の床面積の合計が三千平方メートルを超えるもの（政令で定めるものを除く。）|
|(iv)  Buildings offered for uses other than those mentioned in paragraph (c) in which the aggregate floor areas offered for this purpose exceeds 3,000 square meters (excluding those specified by Cabinet Order)|
|（へ）|第二種住居地域内に建築してはならない建築物|一　（と）項第三号及び第四号並びに（り）項に掲げるもの|
|(f)|Buildings that must not be built in Category 2 Residential Districts|(i) Those mentioned in paragraph (g), items (iii) and (iv), and paragraph (h)|
|二　原動機を使用する工場で作業場の床面積の合計が五十平方メートルを超えるもの|
|(ii) 	Factories using non-road engines with aggregate floor areas of workshops exceeding 50 square meters|
|三　劇場、映画館、演芸場若しくは観覧場又はナイトクラブその他これに類する政令で定めるもの|
|(iii) 	Theaters, movie theaters, entertainment halls, or grand-stands, or nightclubs, or other similar facilities as specified by Cabinet Order|
|四　自動車車庫で床面積の合計が三百平方メートルを超えるもの又は三階以上の部分にあるもの（建築物に附属するもので政令で定めるもの又は都市計画として決定されたものを除く。）|
|(iv) 	Automobile garages with the aggregate floor areas in excess of 300 square meters, or automobile garages in the third or higher floors of a building (excluding those annexed to buildings as specified by Cabinet Order or those specified in city planning)|
|五　倉庫業を営む倉庫|
|(v) 	Commercial warehouses|
|六　店舗、飲食店、展示場、遊技場、勝馬投票券発売所、場外車券売場その他これらに類する用途で政令で定めるものに供する建築物でその用途に供する部分の床面積の合計が一万平方メートルを超えるもの|
|(vi) 	Buildings offered for use as stores, dining facilities, exhibition halls, amusement halls, betting windows (horse racing), off-track betting windows (bicycle racing or motersycle racing), or other use similar thereto as specified by Cabinet Order, and where the aggregate of floor areas of the parts offered for these uses exceeds 10,000 square meters|
|（と）|準住居地域内に建築してはならない建築物|一　（り）項に掲げるもの|
|(g)|Buildings that must not be built in Quasi-residential Districts|(i)	Those mentioned in paragraph (h)|
|二　原動機を使用する工場で作業場の床面積の合計が五十平方メートルを超えるもの（作業場の床面積の合計が百五十平方メートルを超えない自動車修理工場を除く。）|
|(ii) 	Factories using non-road engines with the aggregate floor areas of workshops exceeding 50 square meters (excluding automobile repair shops with the aggregate of floor areas of workshops not exceeding 150 square meters)|
|三　次に掲げる事業（特殊の機械の使用その他の特殊の方法による事業であつて住居の環境を害するおそれがないものとして政令で定めるものを除く。）を営む工場|
|(iii) Factories engaged in businesses mentioned in the following items (excluding those using special machinery or other special methods that are specified by Cabinet Order as ones that are not detrimental to the residential environment)|
|（一）容量十リットル以上三十リットル以下のアセチレンガス発生器を用いる金属の工作|
|(1) Metal work using acetylene gas generators whose capacity is from 10ℓ to 30 ℓ|
|（一の二）印刷用インキの製造|
|(1)-2 Manufacture of ink for printing|
|（二）出力の合計が〇・七五キロワット以下の原動機を使用する塗料の吹付|
|(2) Spraying of paints using non-road engines with a total output is 0.75 kW or less|
|（二の二）原動機を使用する魚肉の練製品の製造|
|(2)-2 Manufacture of fish paste using non-road engines|
|（三）原動機を使用する二台以下の研磨機による金属の乾燥研磨（工具研磨を除く。）|
|(3) Dry polishing of metal by using two or fewer polishing machines run by non-road engines (excluding those for polishing of tools and implements)|
|（四）コルク、エボナイト若しくは合成樹脂の粉砕若しくは乾燥研磨又は木材の粉砕で原動機を使用するもの|
|(4) Grinding, or dry polishing of cork, ebonite or synthetic resin, or grinding of wood, those of which using non-road engines|
|（四の二）厚さ〇・五ミリメートル以上の金属板のつち打加工（金属工芸品の製造を目的とするものを除く。）又は原動機を使用する金属のプレス（液圧プレスのうち矯正プレスを使用するものを除く。）若しくはせん断|
|(4)-2 Hammer processing of metal boards 0.5 mm or more in thickness (excluding processing for the purpose of manufacturing metal crafted goods), or pressing (excluding hydraulic press operations, those of which using a straightening press) or shearing metal, those of which using non-road engines|
|（四の三）印刷用平版の研磨|
|(4)-3 Polishing of lithograph for printing|
|（四の四）糖衣機を使用する製品の製造|
|(4)-4 Manufacturing of products with sugar-coating machines|
|（四の五）原動機を使用するセメント製品の製造|
|(4)-5 Manufacture of cement goods using non-road engines|
|（四の六）ワイヤーフォーミングマシンを使用する金属線の加工で出力の合計が〇・七五キロワットを超える原動機を使用するもの|
|(4)-6 Processing of wire using a wire forming machine, those of which using non-road engines with a total output exceeding 0.75 kW|
|（五）木材の引割若しくはかんな削り、裁縫、機織、撚糸、組ひも、編物、製袋又はやすりの目立で出力の合計が〇・七五キロワットを超える原動機を使用するもの|
|(5) Splitting or planing of lumber, sewing, machine weaving, stranding of thread for weaving machines, braid making, knitting, bag making, or setting of files, those of which using non-road engines with a total output exceeds 0.75 kW|
|（六）製針又は石材の引割で出力の合計が一・五キロワットを超える原動機を使用するもの|
|(6) Making of needles or cutting of stone slabs, those of which using non-road engines with a total output exceeds 1.5 kW|
|（七）出力の合計が二・五キロワットを超える原動機を使用する製粉|
|(7) Milling using non-road engines with a total output exceeds 2.5 kW|
|（八）合成樹脂の射出成形加工|
|(8) Injection moulding process of synthetic resins|
|（九）出力の合計が十キロワットを超える原動機を使用する金属の切削|
|(9) Cutting and shaving of metal using non-road engines with a total output exceeds 10 kW|
|（十）メッキ|
|(10) Metal plating|
|（十一）原動機の出力の合計が一・五キロワットを超える空気圧縮機を使用する作業|
|(11) Work using air compressors with a total output of non-road engines exceeding 1.5 kW|
|（十二）　原動機を使用する印刷|
|(12) Printing using non-road engines|
|（十三）ベンディングマシン（ロール式のものに限る。）を使用する金属の加工|
|(13) Processing metal using bending machines (limited to roll type)|
|（十四）タンブラーを使用する金属の加工|
|(14) Metal processing using tumblers|
|（十五）ゴム練用又は合成樹脂練用のロール機（カレンダーロール機を除く。）を使用する作業|
|(15) Work using a roller which uses rubber or synthetic resin (excluding calendar roller)|
|（十六）（一）から（十五）までに掲げるもののほか、安全上若しくは防火上の危険の度又は衛生上若しくは健康上の有害の度が高いことにより、住居の環境を保護する上で支障があるものとして政令で定める事業|
|(16) In addition to that mentioned in items (i) through (xv), businesses which are specified by Cabinet Order as being detrimental to the residential environment by posing a danger to safety or fire prevention, or by being highly likely to be detrimental to sanitation or human health|
|四　（る）項第一号（一）から（三）まで、（十一）又は（十二）の物品（（ぬ）項第四号及び（る）項第二号において「危険物」という。）の貯蔵又は処理に供するもので政令で定めるもの|
|(iv) Those specified by Cabinet Order as those used for the storage or treatment of articles mentioned in  paragraph (k), items (i) through (iii) and items (xi) and (xii) (referred to as the hazardous materials in paragraph (J), item (iv) and paragraph (k), item (ii))|
|五　劇場、映画館、演芸場若しくは観覧場のうち客席の部分の床面積の合計が二百平方メートル以上のもの又はナイトクラブその他これに類する用途で政令で定めるものに供する建築物でその用途に供する部分の床面積の合計が二百平方メートル以上のもの|
|(v)  	Theaters, movie theaters, entertainment halls, or grand-stands in which the aggregate floor areas for the seating space is 200 square meters or more, or where the aggregate floor area used for nightclubs, or for other use similar thereto as specified by Cabinet Order, and where the aggregate of floor areas of the parts offered for these uses exceeds 200 square meters or more|
|六　前号に掲げるもののほか、劇場、映画館、演芸場若しくは観覧場、ナイトクラブその他これに類する用途で政令で定めるもの又は店舗、飲食店、展示場、遊技場、勝馬投票券発売所、場外車券売場その他これらに類する用途で政令で定めるものに供する建築物でその用途に供する部分（劇場、映画館、演芸場又は観覧場の用途に供する部分にあつては、客席の部分に限る。）の床面積の合計が一万平方メートルを超えるもの|
|(vi) 	In addition to those mentioned in the preceding item, buildings offered for use as theaters, movie theaters, entertainment halls, grand-stands, nightclubs or for similar purposes as specified by Cabinet Order, or as stores, dining facilities, exhibition halls, amusement halls, betting windows (horse racing), off-track betting windows (bicycle racing or motersycle racing), or other use similar thereto as specified by Cabinet Order, and where the aggregate of floor areas of the parts offered for these purposes (limited to the seating space in the case of the parts offered for theaters, movie theaters, entertainment halls or grand-stands) exceeds 10,000 square meters|
|（ち）|田園住居地域内に建築することができる建築物|一　（い）項第一号から第九号までに掲げるもの|
|(h)|Buildings that may be built in Countryside Residential Districts|(i) Those mentioned in paragraph (a), items (i) through (ix)|
|二　農産物の生産、集荷、処理又は貯蔵に供するもの（政令で定めるものを除く。）|
|(ii)  Buildings for use as facilities for the production, collection, processing, or storage of agricultural products (excluding those specified by Cabinet Order)|
|三　農業の生産資材の貯蔵に供するもの|
|(iii)  Buildings for use as facilities for the storage of production materials for agriculture|
|四　地域で生産された農産物の販売を主たる目的とする店舗その他の農業の利便を増進するために必要な店舗、飲食店その他これらに類する用途に供するもののうち政令で定めるものでその用途に供する部分の床面積の合計が五百平方メートル以内のもの（三階以上の部分をその用途に供するものを除く。）|
|(iv)  Those offered for use as stores whose main purpose is to sell agricultural products produced in the region, and other stores, dining facilities or other use similar that necessary to promote the convenience of agriculture thereto as specified by Cabinet Order, and where the total floor area offered for these use is 500 square meters or less (excluding buildings whose third floor and above are offered for these uses)|
|五　前号に掲げるもののほか、店舗、飲食店その他これらに類する用途に供するもののうち政令で定めるものでその用途に供する部分の床面積の合計が百五十平方メートル以内のもの（三階以上の部分をその用途に供するものを除く。）|
|(v)  In addition to those mentioned in the preceding item, those offered for use as stores, dining facilities, or other purposes similar thereto as specified by Cabinet Order, and where the total floor area offered for these purposes is 1(v) 0 square meters or less (excluding buildings whose third floor and above are offered for these uses)|
|六　前各号の建築物に附属するもの（政令で定めるものを除く。）|
|(vi)  Those annexed to buildings coming under any of the preceding items (excluding those specified by Cabinet Order)|
|（り）|近隣商業地域内に建築してはならない建築物|一　（ぬ）項に掲げるもの|
|(i)|Buildings that must not be built in Neighborhood Commercial Districts|(i) Those mentioned in paragraph (i)|
|二　キャバレー、料理店その他これらに類するもの|
|(ii) 	Cabarets, restaurants, night clubs, and dance halls, and others similar thereto|
|三　個室付浴場業に係る公衆浴場その他これに類する政令で定めるもの|
|(iii) 	Bathhouses with private rooms, and others similar thereto specified by Cabinet Order|
|（ぬ）|商業地域内に建築してはならない建築物|一　（る）項第一号及び第二号に掲げるもの|
|(j)|Buildings that must not be built in Commercial Districts|(i) Those mentioned in paragraph (k), items (i) and (ii)|
|二　原動機を使用する工場で作業場の床面積の合計が百五十平方メートルを超えるもの（日刊新聞の印刷所及び作業場の床面積の合計が三百平方メートルを超えない自動車修理工場を除く。）|
|(ii) 	Factories using non-road engines with the aggregate of floor areas of workshops exceeding 150 square meters (excluding printing offices of daily newspapers, and automobile repair shops with the aggregate of floor areas of workshops not exceeding 300 square meters)|
|三　次に掲げる事業（特殊の機械の使用その他の特殊の方法による事業であつて商業その他の業務の利便を害するおそれがないものとして政令で定めるものを除く。）を営む工場|
|(iii) 	Factories engaged in businesses as mentioned in the following items (excluding those using special machinery or other special methods, that are specified by Cabinet Order as ones that are not detrimental to the smooth operation of commercial activities and other services)|
|（一）玩具煙火の製造|
|(1) Manufacture of toy pyrotechnics|
|（二）アセチレンガスを用いる金属の工作（アセチレンガス発生器の容量三十リットル以下のもの又は溶解アセチレンガスを用いるものを除く。）|
|(2) Metal work using acetylene gas (excluding work using acetylene gas generators whose capacity is 30 liters or less and work using dissolved acetylene gas)|
|（三）引火性溶剤を用いるドライクリーニング、ドライダイイング又は塗料の加熱乾燥若しくは焼付（赤外線を用いるものを除く。）|
|(3) Dry cleaning or dry dyeing using inflammable solvents or heat drying or baking of paint (excluding cases where infrared is used)|
|（四）セルロイドの加熱加工又は機械のこぎりを使用する加工|
|(4) Heat treating or saw-machine processing of celluloid|
|（五）絵具又は水性塗料の製造|
|(5) Manufacture of paints or water paints|
|（六）出力の合計が〇・七五キロワットを超える原動機を使用する塗料の吹付|
|(6) Spraying of paints using non-road engines with a total output exceeds 0.75 kW|
|（七）亜硫酸ガスを用いる物品の漂白|
|(7) Bleaching of materials using sulfurous acid gas|
|（八）骨炭その他動物質炭の製造|
|(8) Manufacture of bone charcoal or other animal charcoal|
|（八の二）せつけんの製造|
|(8)-2 Manufacture of soap|
|（八の三）魚粉、フェザーミール、肉骨粉、肉粉若しくは血粉又はこれらを原料とする飼料の製造|
|(8)-3 Manufacture of fish powder, feather-meal, bone and meat powder, meat powder, or blood powder, or feeds using any of the above as raw material|
|（八の四）手すき紙の製造|
|(8)-4 	Manufacture of hand-laid paper|
|（九）羽又は毛の洗浄、染色又は漂白|
|(9) Washing, dyeing or bleaching of feathers or hair|
|（十）ぼろ、くず綿、くず紙、くず糸、くず毛その他これらに類するものの消毒、選別、洗浄又は漂白|
|(10) Disinfection, selection, washing or bleaching of rag, waste cotton, waste paper, waste yarn, waste fur and others similar thereto|
|（十一）製綿、古綿の再製、起毛、せん毛、反毛又はフェルトの製造で原動機を使用するもの|
|(11) Manufacture of cotton, remanufacture of old cotton, nap raising, wool shearing, manufacture of reclaimed wool, or felt, those of which using non-road engines|
|（十二）骨、角、牙、ひづめ若しくは貝殻の引割若しくは乾燥研磨又は三台以上の研磨機による金属の乾燥研磨で原動機を使用するもの|
|(12) Sawing or dry polishing of bone, horn, tusks, hooves or shell, or dry polishing of metal by means of 3 or more polishing machines, those of which using non-road engines|
|（十三）鉱物、岩石、土砂、コンクリート、アスファルト・コンクリート、硫黄、金属、ガラス、れんが、陶磁器、骨又は貝殻の粉砕で原動機を使用するもの|
|(13) Pulverizing of mineral, rock, sand, concrete, asphalt-concrete, sulfur, metal, glass, brick, pottery or porcelain, bone, or shells, those of which using non-road engines|
|（十三の二）レディーミクストコンクリートの製造又はセメントの袋詰で出力の合計が二・五キロワットを超える原動機を使用するもの|
|(13)-2 Manufacture of ready-mixed concrete or filling bags with cement, those of which using non-road engines with a total output exceeds 2.5 kW|
|（十四）墨、懐炉灰又はれん炭の製造|
|(14) Manufacture of India-ink, Kairobai, or briquette|
|（十五）活字若しくは金属工芸品の鋳造又は金属の溶融で容量の合計が五十リットルを超えないるつぼ又は窯を使用するもの（印刷所における活字の鋳造を除く。）|
|(15) Casting of printing types or metal industrial art goods, or melting of metal, those of which using crucibles or furnaces, with a total capacity does not exceed 50 L (excluding casting of types at printing office)|
|（十六）瓦、れんが、土器、陶磁器、人造砥石、るつぼ又はほうろう鉄器の製造|
|(16) Manufacture of tile, brick, earthenware, pottery or porcelain, artificial whetstone, crucibles, or enameled ironware|
|（十七）ガラスの製造又は砂吹|
|(17) Manufacture or sand blasting of glass|
|（十七の二）金属の溶射又は砂吹|
|(17)-2 Metal spraying or sand blasting|
|（十七の三）鉄板の波付加工|
|(17)-3 Corrugation of iron board|
|（十七の四）ドラム缶の洗浄又は再生|
|(17)-4 Washing or remanufacture of drum containers|
|（十八）スプリングハンマーを使用する金属の鍛造|
|(18) Forging using spring hammers|
|（十九）伸線、伸管又はロールを用いる金属の圧延で出力の合計が四キロワット以下の原動機を使用するもの|
|(19) Wire drawing, tube drawing, or metal rolling, those of which using non-road engines with a total output is 4 kW or less|
|（二十）（一）から（十九）までに掲げるもののほか、安全上若しくは防火上の危険の度又は衛生上若しくは健康上の有害の度が高いことにより、商業その他の業務の利便を増進する上で支障があるものとして政令で定める事業|
|(20) In addition to those mentioned in items (i) through (xix), businesses which are specified by Cabinet Order as being detrimental to the improvement of the smooth operation of commercial activity and other services by posing a danger to safety or fire prevention, or by being highly likely to be detrimental to sanitation or human health|
|四　危険物の貯蔵又は処理に供するもので政令で定めるもの|
|(iv) 	Buildings for use as facilities for the storage or treatment of hazardous materials as specified by Cabinet Order|
|（る）|準工業地域内に建築してはならない建築物|一　次に掲げる事業（特殊の機械の使用その他の特殊の方法による事業であつて環境の悪化をもたらすおそれのない工業の利便を害するおそれがないものとして政令で定めるものを除く。）を営む工場|
|(k)|Buildings that must not be built in Quasi-industrial Districts|(i) 	Factories engaged in businesses as mentioned in the following items (excluding those using special machinery or other special methods that are specified by Cabinet Order as ones that are not detrimental to the smooth operation of industries that do not harm the environment)|
|（一）火薬類取締法（昭和二十五年法律第百四十九号）の火薬類（玩具煙火を除く。）の製造|
|(1) Manufacture of explosives (excluding toy pyrotechnics) as specified in the Explosives Control Act (Act No. 149 of 1950)|
|（二）消防法（昭和二十三年法律第百八十六号）第二条第七項に規定する危険物の製造（政令で定めるものを除く。）|
|(2) Manufacture of hazardous materials provided for in Article 2, paragraph (7) of the Fire Services Act (Act No. 186 of 1948) (excluding those specified by Cabinet Order)|
|（三）マッチの製造|
|(3) Manufacture of matches|
|（四）ニトロセルロース製品の製造|
|(4) Manufacture of nitrocellulose products|
|（五）ビスコース製品、アセテート又は銅アンモニアレーヨンの製造|
|(5) Manufacture of viscose products, acetate or cuprammonium rayon products|
|（六）合成染料若しくはその中間物、顔料又は塗料の製造（漆又は水性塗料の製造を除く。）|
|(6) Manufacture of synthetic dyestuffs or their intermediate products, pigments, or paints (Excluding the manufacture of lacquer or water paints)|
|（七）引火性溶剤を用いるゴム製品又は芳香油の製造|
|(7) Manufacture of rubber products or aromatic oils by using inflammable solvents|
|（八）乾燥油又は引火性溶剤を用いる擬革紙布又は防水紙布の製造|
|(8) Manufacture of imitation-leather paper/cloth or water-proof paper/cloth using drying oils or inflammable solvents|
|（九）木材を原料とする活性炭の製造（水蒸気法によるものを除く。）|
|(9) Manufacture of activated carbon using wood as raw material (excluding that manufactured by vapor method)|
|（十）石炭ガス類又はコークスの製造|
|(10) Manufacture of coal gases or coke|
|（十一）可燃性ガスの製造（政令で定めるものを除く。）|
|(11) Manufacture of flammable gases (excluding those specified by Cabinet Order)|
|（十二）圧縮ガス又は液化ガスの製造（製氷又は冷凍を目的とするものを除く。）|
|(12) Manufacture of compressed gas or liquid gas (excluding that for ice manufacturing or refrigeration)|
|（十三）塩素、臭素、ヨード、硫黄、塩化硫黄、弗化水素酸、塩酸、硝酸、硫酸、燐酸、苛性カリ、苛性ソーダ、アンモニア水、炭酸カリ、洗濯ソーダ、ソーダ灰、さらし粉、次硝酸蒼鉛、亜硫酸塩類、チオ硫酸塩類、砒素化合物、鉛化合物、バリウム化合物、銅化合物、水銀化合物、シアン化合物、クロールズルホン酸、クロロホルム、四塩化炭素、ホルマリン、ズルホナール、グリセリン、イヒチオールズルホン酸アンモン、酢酸、石炭酸、安息香酸、タンニン酸、アセトアニリド、アスピリン又はグアヤコールの製造|
|(13) Manufacture of chlorine, bromine, iodine, sulfur, sulfur chloride, hydrofluoric acid, hydrochloric acid, nitric acid, sulfuric acid, phosphoric acid, caustic potash, caustic soda, ammonia water, potassium carbonate, washing soda, soda ash, bleaching powder, bismuth subnitrate, sulfites, thiosulfates, arsenic compounds, lead compounds, barium compounds, copper compounds, mercury compounds, cyanogen compounds, chlor sulforatic acid, chloroform, carbon tetrachloride, formalin, sulphonal, glycerin, ammonium ichthyol sulfonate, acetic acid, carbolic acid, benzoic acid, tannic acid, acetanilide, aspirin, or guaiacol|
|（十四）たんぱく質の加水分解による製品の製造|
|(14) Manufacture of products by hydrolysis of protein|
|（十五）油脂の採取、硬化又は加熱加工（化粧品の製造を除く。）|
|(15) Collection, hardening, or heating work of oils and fats (excluding manufacture of cosmetics)|
|（十六）ファクチス、合成樹脂、合成ゴム又は合成繊維の製造|
|(16) Manufacture of factice, synthetic resin, synthetic rubber, or synthetic fibers|
|（十七）肥料の製造|
|(17) Manufacture of fertilizer|
|（十八）製紙（手すき紙の製造を除く。）又はパルプの製造|
|(18) Manufacture of paper (excluding manufacture of hand-laid paper) or pulp|
|（十九）製革、にかわの製造又は毛皮若しくは骨の精製|
|(19) Manufacture of leather or glue, or refining of fur or bone|
|（二十）アスファルトの精製|
|(20) Refining of asphalt|
|（二十一）アスファルト、コールタール、木タール、石油蒸溜産物又はその残りかすを原料とする製造|
|(21) Manufacture using asphalt, coal tar, wood tar, petroleum distillates, or their residues as raw material|
|（二十二）セメント、石膏、消石灰、生石灰又はカーバイドの製造|
|(22) Manufacture of cement, gypsum, hydrated lime, quick lime, or carbide|
|（二十三）金属の溶融又は精練（容量の合計が五十リットルを超えないるつぼ若しくは窯を使用するもの又は活字若しくは金属工芸品の製造を目的とするものを除く。）|
|(23) Metal melting or refining (excluding cases of using crucibles or furnaces whose total capacity does not exceed 50 L or cases of manufacturing printing types or metal industrial art goods)|
|（二十四）炭素粉を原料とする炭素製品若しくは黒鉛製品の製造又は黒鉛の粉砕|
|(24) Manufacture of carbon or graphite products using carbon powder as raw material, or pulverizing of graphite|
|（二十五）金属厚板又は形鋼の工作で原動機を使用するはつり作業（グラインダーを用いるものを除く。）、びよう打作業又は孔埋作業を伴うもの|
|(25) Working of thick metal plates or shapes, with chipping work (excluding cases of using grinders), rivet work or drilling work, those of which using non-road engines|
|（二十六）鉄釘類又は鋼球の製造|
|(26) Manufacture of iron nails or steel balls|
|（二十七）伸線、伸管又はロールを用いる金属の圧延で出力の合計が四キロワットを超える原動機を使用するもの|
|(27) Wire drawing, tube drawing, or metal rolling, those of which using non-road engines with a total output exceeds 4 kW|
|（二十八）鍛造機（スプリングハンマーを除く。）を使用する金属の鍛造|
|(28) Forging of metal using forging machines (excluding spring hammers)|
|（二十九）動物の臓器又は排せつ物を原料とする医薬品の製造|
|(29) Manufacture of medical supplies using internal organs or excrement of animals as raw material|
|（三十）石綿を含有する製品の製造又は粉砕|
|(30) The manufacture or pulverization of products containing asbestos|
|（三十一）（一）から（三十）までに掲げるもののほか、安全上若しくは防火上の危険の度又は衛生上若しくは健康上の有害の度が高いことにより、環境の悪化をもたらすおそれのない工業の利便を増進する上で支障があるものとして政令で定める事業|
|(31) In addition to those mentioned in items (i) to (xxx), businesses which are specified by Cabinet Order as being detrimental to the improvement of the smooth operation of industries that do not harm the environment by posing a danger to safety or fire prevention, or by being highly likely to be detrimental to sanitation or human health|
|二　危険物の貯蔵又は処理に供するもので政令で定めるもの|
|(ii) 	Buildings for use as facilities for the storage or treatment of hazardous materials as specified by Cabinet Order|
|三　個室付浴場業に係る公衆浴場その他これに類する政令で定めるもの|
|(iii) 	Bathhouses with private rooms, and others similar thereto specified by Cabinet Order|
|（を）|工業地域内に建築してはならない建築物|一　（る）項第三号に掲げるもの|
|(l)|Buildings that must not be built in Industrial Districts|(i) Those mentioned in paragraph (k), item (iii)|
|二　ホテル又は旅館|
|(ii) 	Hotels/inns|
|三　キャバレー、料理店その他これらに類するもの|
|(iii) 	Cabarets, restaurants, night clubs, dance halls, and others similar thereto|
|四　劇場、映画館、演芸場若しくは観覧場又はナイトクラブその他これに類する政令で定めるもの|
|(iv) 	Theaters, movie theaters, entertainment halls or grand-stands, or nightclubs or others similar thereto as specified by Cabinet Order|
|五　学校（幼保連携型認定こども園を除く。）|
|(v) 	Schools (excluding child center in coordination between kindergartenand nursery centers)|
|六　病院|
|(vi) 	Hospitals|
|七　店舗、飲食店、展示場、遊技場、勝馬投票券発売所、場外車券売場その他これらに類する用途で政令で定めるものに供する建築物でその用途に供する部分の床面積の合計が一万平方メートルを超えるもの|
|(vii) 	Buildings offered for use as stores, dining facilities, exhibition halls, amusement halls, betting windows (horse racing), off-track betting windows (bicycle racing or motrsycle rasing), or other use similar thereto as specified by Cabinet Order, and where the aggregate of floor areas of the parts offered for these uses exceeds 10,000 square meters|
|（わ）|工業専用地域内に建築してはならない建築物|一　（を）項に掲げるもの|
|(m)|Buildings that must not be built in Exclusive Industrial Districts|(i) Those mentioned in paragraph (l)|
|二　住宅|
|(ii) 	Houses|
|三　共同住宅、寄宿舎又は下宿|
|(iii) 	Apartment houses, dormitories, or boarding houses|
|四　老人ホーム、福祉ホームその他これらに類するもの|
|(iv) 	Nursing homes for the elderly, welfare homes, and others similar thereto|
|五　物品販売業を営む店舗又は飲食店|
|(v) 	Stores engaged in commodity sales or dining facilities|
|六　図書館、博物館その他これらに類するもの|
|(vi) 	Libraries, museums, or others similar thereto|
|七　ボーリング場、スケート場、水泳場その他これらに類する政令で定める運動施設|
|(vii) Bowling alleys, skating rinks, swimming pools, and other similar athletic facilities specified by Cabinet Order|
|八　マージャン屋、ぱちんこ屋、射的場、勝馬投票券発売所、場外車券売場その他これらに類するもの|
|(viii) 	Mah-jongg parlors, pachinko halls, shooting galleries, betting windows (horse racing), off-track betting windows (bicycle racing or motrsycle rasing), and others similar thereto|
|（か）|用途地域の指定のない区域（都市計画法第七条第一項に規定する市街化調整区域を除く。）内に建築してはならない建築物|劇場、映画館、演芸場若しくは観覧場、ナイトクラブその他これに類する用途で政令で定めるもの又は店舗、飲食店、展示場、遊技場、勝馬投票券発売所、場外車券売場その他これらに類する用途で政令で定めるものに供する建築物でその用途に供する部分（劇場、映画館、演芸場又は観覧場の用途に供する部分にあつては、客席の部分に限る。）の床面積の合計が一万平方メートルを超えるもの|
|(n)|Buildings that must not be built in areas that are not designated as Use Districts (excluding Urbanization Control Areas as specified by Article 7, paragraph (1) of the City Planning Act)|Buildings offered for use as theaters, movie theaters, entertainment halls, grand-stands, nightclubs or other uses similar thereto as specified by Cabinet Order, or as stores, dining facilities, exhibition halls, amusement halls, betting windows (horse racing), off-track betting windows (bicycle racing or motrsycle rasing), or other use similar thereto as specified by Cabinet Order, and where the aggregate of floor areas of the parts offered for these uses  (limited to the seating space in the case of the parts offered for uses of theaters, movie theaters, entertainment halls or grand-stands) offered for these uses exceeds 10,000 square meters.|
別表第三　前面道路との関係についての建築物の各部分の高さの制限　（第五十六条、第九十一条関係）
Appended Table 3 Restrictions on Height of Each Part of a Building in Connection with Front Roads (Re: Article 56 and Article 91)
||（い）|（ろ）|（は）|（に）|
||(a)|(b)|(c)|(d)|
||建築物がある地域、地区又は区域|第五十二条第一項、第二項、第七項及び第九項の規定による容積率の限度|距離|数値|
||Limit of the floor are zones, districts, or areas where buildings exist|Limit of the floor area ratio as specified in Article 52, paragraphs (1), (2), (7), and (9)|Distance|Value|
|一|第一種低層住居専用地域、第二種低層住居専用地域、第一種中高層住居専用地域、第二種中高層住居専用地域若しくは田園住居地域内の建築物又は第一種住居地域、第二種住居地域若しくは準住居地域内の建築物（四の項に掲げる建築物を除く。）|十分の二十以下の場合|二十メートル|一・二五|
|(1)|Buildings in Category 1 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts,Category 2 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Category 1 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Category 2 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts or Countryside Residential Districts, or buildings in Category 1 Residential Districts, Category 2 Residential Districts or Quasi-residential Districts (excluding buildings referred to in paragraph (4))|20/10 or less|20 m|1.25|
|十分の二十を超え、十分の三十以下の場合|二十五メートル|
|Over 20/10 and 30/10 or less|25 m|
|十分の三十を超え、十分の四十以下の場合|三十メートル|
|Over 30/10 and 40/10 or less|30 m|
|十分の四十を超える場合|三十五メートル|
|Over 40/10|35 m|
|二|近隣商業地域又は商業地域内の建築物|十分の四十以下の場合|二十メートル|一・五|
|(2)|Neighborhood Commercial Districts  or Commercial Districts|40/10 or less|20 m|1.5|
|十分の四十を超え、十分の六十以下の場合|二十五メートル|
|Over 40/10 and 60/10 or less|25 m|
|十分の六十を超え、十分の八十以下の場合|三十メートル|
|Over 60/10 and 80/10 or less|30 m|
|十分の八十を超え、十分の百以下の場合|三十五メートル|
|Over 80/10 and 100/10 or less|35 m|
|十分の百を超え、十分の百十以下の場合|四十メートル|
|Over 100/10 and 110/10 or less|40 m|
|十分の百十を超え、十分の百二十以下の場合|四十五メートル|
|Over 110/10 and 120/10 or less|45 m|
|十分の百二十を超える場合|五十メートル|
|Over 120/10|50 m|
|三|準工業地域内の建築物（四の項に掲げる建築物を除く。）又は工業地域若しくは工業専用地域内の建築物|十分の二十以下の場合|二十メートル|一・五|
|(3)|Buildings in Quasi-industrial Districts (excluding buildings referred to in paragraph (4)), or buildings in Industrial Districts, or Exclusive Industrial Districts|20/10 or less|20 m|1.5|
|十分の二十を超え、十分の三十以下の場合|二十五メートル|
|Over 20/10 and 30/10 or less|25 m|
|十分の三十を超え、十分の四十以下の場合|三十メートル|
|Over 30/10 and 40/10 or less|30 m|
|十分の四十を超える場合|三十五メートル|
|Over 40/10|35 m|
|四|第一種住居地域、第二種住居地域、準住居地域又は準工業地域内について定められた高層住居誘導地区内の建築物であつて、その住宅の用途に供する部分の床面積の合計がその延べ面積の三分の二以上であるもの||三十五メートル|一・五|
|(4)|Buildings in High-rise residential Attraction Districts established within Category 1 Residential Districts, Category 2 Residential Districts, Quasi-residential Districts, or Quasi-industrial Districts, and with the aggregate floor areas of residential use of that building equal to or greater than 2/3 of its total floor area||35 m|1.5|
|五|用途地域の指定のない区域内の建築物|十分の二十以下の場合|二十メートル|一・二五又は一・五のうち、特定行政庁が土地利用の状況等を考慮し当該区域を区分して都道府県都市計画審議会の議を経て定めるもの|
|(5)|Buildings in areas with no Use Districts|20/10 and less|20 m|1.25 or 2.5; the Designated Administrative Agency shall categorize the relevant area accounting for land use conditions and select the value applied through consultations with the Prefectural City Planning Councils.|
|十分の二十を超え、十分の三十以下の場合|二十五メートル|
|Over 20/10 and 30/10 or less|25 m|
|十分の三十を超える場合|三十メートル|
|Over 30/10|30 m|
備考
Remarks
一　建築物がこの表（い）欄に掲げる地域、地区又は区域の二以上にわたる場合においては、同欄中「建築物」とあるのは、「建築物の部分」とする。
(i) if a building extends over two or more areas, districts, or zones set forth in column (a), the term "buildings" in that column shall read "parts of a building";
二　建築物の敷地がこの表（い）欄に掲げる地域、地区又は区域の二以上にわたる場合における同表（は）欄に掲げる距離の適用に関し必要な事項は、政令で定める。
(ii) if the site of a building extends over two or more areas, districts, or zones set forth in column (a) of this table, matters necessary for the application of the distance set forth in column (c) of that table shall be specified by Cabinet Order;
三　この表（い）欄一の項に掲げる第一種中高層住居専用地域若しくは第二種中高層住居専用地域（第五十二条第一項第二号の規定により、容積率の限度が十分の四十以上とされている地域に限る。）又は第一種住居地域、第二種住居地域若しくは準住居地域のうち、特定行政庁が都道府県都市計画審議会の議を経て指定する区域内の建築物については、（は）欄一の項中「二十五メートル」とあるのは「二十メートル」と、「三十メートル」とあるのは「二十五メートル」と、「三十五メートル」とあるのは「三十メートル」と、（に）欄一の項中「一・二五」とあるのは「一・五」とする。
(iii) for buildings within Category 1 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Category 2 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts (limited to zones where the limit of floor area ratio is 40/10 or more pursuant to the provisions of Article 52, paragraph (1), item (ii)) set forth in column (a), row (1) of this table or buildings within areas designated by a Designated Administrative Agency through consultations with the Prefectural City Planning Council among Category 1 Residential Districts, Category 2 Residential Districts or Quasi-residential Districts, "25 meters", "30 meters" and "35 meters" in column (c), row (1) shall be "20 meters", "25 meters" and " 30 meters" respectively and "1.25" in column (d), row (1) shall be "1.5".
別表第四　日影による中高層の建築物の制限　（第五十六条、第五十六条の二関係）
Appended Table 4 Restrictions on Medium-high-rise Buildings due to Shadow (in connection with Article 56 and Article 56-2)
||（い）|（ろ）|（は）|（に）|
||(a)|(b)|(c)|(d)|
||地域又は区域|制限を受ける建築物|平均地盤面からの高さ||敷地境界線からの水平距離が十メートル以内の範囲における日影時間|敷地境界線からの水平距離が十メートルを超える範囲における日影時間|
||Zones or areas|Buildings subject to restrictions|Height from average ground level||Shadow time in an area not exceeding 10 m in horizontal distance from the boundary line of the site|Shadow time in an area exceeding 10 m in horizontal distance from the boundary line of the site|
|一|第一種低層住居専用地域、第二種低層住居専用地域又は田園住居地|軒の高さが七メートルを超える建築物又は地階を除く階数が三以上の建築物|一・五メートル|（一）|三時間（道の区域内にあつては、二時間）|二時間（道の区域内にあつては、一・五時間）|
|(1)|Category 1 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, Buildings in Category 2 Low-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, or Countryside Residential Districts|Buildings whose eaves exceed 7 m in height or buildings with 3 or more stories excluding basement floors|1.5 m|(i)|3 hours (2 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|2 hours (1.5 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|
|（二）|四時間（道の区域内にあつては、三時間）|二・五時間（道の区域内にあつては、二時間）|
|(ii)|4 hours (3 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|2.5 hours (2 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|
|（三）|五時間（道の区域内にあつては、四時間）|三時間（道の区域内にあつては、二・五時間）|
|(iii)|5 hours (4 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|3 hours (2.5 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|
|二|第一種中高層住居専用地域又は第二種中高層住居専用地域|高さが十メートルを超える建築物|四メートル又は六・五メートル|（一）|三時間（道の区域内にあつては、二時間）|二時間（道の区域内にあつては、一・五時間）|
|(2)|Category 1 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts, or Category 2 Medium-to-high-rise Exclusive Residential Districts|Buildings which exceed 10 m in height|4m or 6.5m|(i)|3 hours (2 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|2 hours (1.5 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|
|（二）|四時間（道の区域内にあつては、三時間）|二・五時間（道の区域内にあつては、二時間）|
|(ii)|4 hours (3 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|2.5 hours (2 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|
|（三）|五時間（道の区域内にあつては、四時間）|三時間（道の区域内にあつては、二・五時間）|
|(iii)|5 hours (4 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|3 hours (2.5 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|
|三|第一種住居地域、第二種住居地域、準住居地域、近隣商業地域又は準工業地域|高さが十メートルを超える建築物|四メートル又は六・五メートル|（一）|四時間（道の区域内にあつては、三時間）|二・五時間（道の区域内にあつては、二時間）|
|(3)|Category 1 Residential Districts, Category 2 Residential Districts, Quasi-residential Districts, Neighborhood Commercial District, or Quasi-industrial Districts|Buildings which exceed 10 m in height|4m or 6.5m|(i)|4 hours (3 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|2.5 hours (2 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|
|（二）|五時間（道の区域内にあつては、四時間）|三時間（道の区域内にあつては、二・五時間）|
|(ii)|5 hours (4 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|3 hours (2.5 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|
|四|用途地域の指定のない区域|イ|軒の高さが七メートルを超える建築物又は地階を除く階数が三以上の建築物|一・五メートル|（一）|三時間（道の区域内にあつては、二時間）|二時間（道の区域内にあつては、一・五時間）|
|(4)|Areas with no Use Districts|a|Buildings whose eaves exceed 7 m in height or buildings with 3 or more stories excluding basement floors|1.5m|(i)|3 hours (2 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|2 hours (1.5 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|
|（二）|四時間（道の区域内にあつては、三時間）|二・五時間（道の区域内にあつては、二時間）|
|(ii)|4 hours (3 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|2.5 hours (2 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|
|（三）|五時間（道の区域内にあつては、四時間）|三時間（道の区域内にあつては、二・五時間）|
|(iii)|5 hours (4 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|3 hours (2.5 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|
|ロ|高さが十メートルを超える建築物|四メートル|（一）|三時間（道の区域内にあつては、二時間）|二時間（道の区域内にあつては、一・五時間）|
|b|Buildings which exceed 10 m in height|4m|(i)|3 hours (2 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|2 hours (1.5 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|
|（二）|四時間（道の区域内にあつては、三時間）|二・五時間（道の区域内にあつては、二時間）|
|(ii)|4 hours (3 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|2.5 hours (2 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|
|（三）|五時間（道の区域内にあつては、四時間）|三時間（道の区域内にあつては、二・五時間）|
|(iii)|5 hours (4 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|3 hours (2.5 hours in areas of Hokkaido)|
|この表において、平均地盤面からの高さとは、当該建築物が周囲の地面と接する位置の平均の高さにおける水平面からの高さをいうものとする。|
|The “height from average level” shall mean the height from level plane at the average height of the positions where a building comes in contact with the surrounding ground surface.|
